
The Drowned World
By
J.G. Ballard

Soon it would be too hot. Looking out from the hotel balcony shortly after
eight o'clock, Kerans watched the sun rise behind the dense groves of giant
gymnosperms crowding over the roofs of the abandoned department stores
four hundred yards away on the east side of the lagoon. Even through the
massive olive-green fronds the relentless power of the sun was plainly
tangible. The blunt refracted rays drummed against his bare chest and
shoulders, drawing out the first sweat, and he put on a pair of heavy
sunglasses to protect his eyes. The solar disc was no longer a well-defined
sphere, but a wide expanding ellipse that fanned out across the eastern
horizon like a colossal fire-ball, its reflection turning the dead leaden surface
of the lagoon into a brilliant copper shield. By noon, less than four hours
away, the water would seem to burn.
Usually Kerans woke at five, and reached the biological testing station in
time to do at least four or five hours' work before the heat became
intolerable, but this morning he found himself reluctant to leave the cool, aircurtained
haven of the hotel suite. He had spent a couple of hours over
breakfast alone, and then completed a six page entry in his diary, deliberately
delaying his departure until Colonel Riggs passed the hotel in his patrol boat,
knowing that by then it would be too late to go to the station. The Colonel
was always eager for an hour of conversation, particularly when sustained by a
few rounds of aperitif, and it would be at least eleven-thirty before he left, his
thoughts solely upon lunch at the base.
For some reason, however, Riggs had been delayed. Presumably he was
carrying out a longer sweep than usual of the adjacent lagoons, or perhaps
was waiting for Kerans to arrive at the testing station. For a moment Kerans
wondered whether to try to reach him on the radio transmitter installed by the
signals unit in the lounge, but the console was buried under a pile of books,
its battery flat. The corporal in charge of the radio station at the base had
7
protested to Riggs when his cheerful morning round-up of old pop songs and
local news-an attack by two iguanas on the helicopter the previous night, the
latest temperature and humidity readings- had been cut off abruptly half-way
through the first installment. But Riggs recognised Kerans' unconscious
attempt to sever his links with the base-the careful haphazardness of the
pyramid of books hiding the set contrasted too obviously with Kerans'
otherwise meticulous neatness-and tolerantly accepted his need to isolate
himself.
Leaning on the balcony rail, the slack water ten storeys below reflecting his
thin angular shoulders and gaunt profile, Kerans watched one of the countless
thermal storms rip through a dump of huge horse-tails lining the creek which
led out of the lagoon. Trapped by the surrounding buildings and the inversion
layers a hundred feet above the water, pockets of air would heat rapidly, then
explode upwards like escaping balloons, leaving behind them a sudden
detonating vacuum. For a few seconds the steam clouds hanging over the
creek dispersed, and a vicious miniature tornado lashed across the 6o-feethigh
plants, toppling them like matchsticks. Then, as abruptly, the storm
vanished and the great columnar trunks subsided among one another in the
water like sluggish alligators.
Rationalising, Kerans told himself that he had been wise to remain in the
hotel-the storms were erupting more and more frequently as the temperature
rose-but he knew that his real motive was his acceptance that little now
remained to be done. The biological mapping had become a pointless game,
the new flora following exactly the emergent lines anticipated twenty years
earlier, and he was sure that no-one at Camp Byrd in Northern Greenland
bothered to file his reports, let alone read them.
In fact, old Dr. Bodkin, Kerans' assistant at the station, had slyly prepared
what purported to be an eyewitness description by one of Colonel Riggs'
sergeants of a large sail-backed lizard with a gigantic dorsal fin which had
8
been seen cruising across one of the lagoons, in all respects indistinguishable
from the Pelycosaur, an early Pennsylvanian reptile. Had the report been
taken at its face value-heralding the momentous return of the age of the great
reptiles-an army of ecologists would have descended on them immediately,
backed by a tactical atomic weapons unit and orders to proceed south at a
steady twenty knots. But apart from the routine acknowledgement signal
nothing had been heard. Perhaps the specialists at Camp Byrd were too tired
even to laugh.
At the end of the month Colonel Riggs and his small holding unit would
complete their survey of the city (had it once been Berlin, Paris or London?
Kerans asked himself and set off northward, towing the testing station with
them. Kerans found it difficult to believe that he would ever leave the
penthouse suite where he had lived for the past six months. The Ritz's
reputation, he gladly agreed, was richly deserved-the bathroom, for example,
with its black marble basins and gold-plated taps and mirrors, was like the
side-chapel of a cathedral. In a curious way it satisfied him to think that he
was the last guest who would stay at the hotel, identifying what he realised
was a concluding phase of his own life-the northward odyssey through the
drowned cities in the south, soon to end with their return to Camp Byrd and
its bracing disciplines-and this farewell sunset of the hotel's long splendid
history.
He had commandeered the Ritz the day after their arrival, eager to
exchange his cramped cabin among the laboratory benches at the testing
station for the huge, high-ceilinged state-rooms of the deserted hotel. Already
he accepted the lavish brocaded furniture and the bronze art nouveau statuary
in the corridor niches as a natural background to his existence, savouring the
subtle atmosphere of melancholy that surrounded these last vestiges of a level
of civilisation now virtually vanished forever. Too many of the other buildings
around the lagoon had long since slipped and slid away below the silt,
revealing their gimcrack origins, and the Ritz now stood in splendid isolation
9
on the west shore, even the rich blue moulds sprouting from the carpets in
the dark corridors adding to its 19th century dignity.
The suite had originally been designed for a Milanese financier, and was
lavishly furnished and engineered. The heat curtains were still perfectly sealed,
although the first six storeys of the hotel were below water level and the load
walls were beginning to crack, and the 250-amp air-conditioning unit had
worked without a halt. Although it had been unoccupied for ten years little
dust had collected over the mantelpieces and gilt end-tables, and the triptych
of photo graphic portraits on the crocodile-skin desk-financier, financier and
sleek well-fed family, financier and even sleeker fifty-storey office blockrevealed
scarcely a blemish. Luckily for Kerans his predecessor had left in a
hurry, and the cupboards and wardrobes were packed with treasure, ivoryhandled
squash rackets and handprinted dressing gowns, the cocktail bar
stocked with an ample supply of what were now vintage whiskeys and
brandies.
A giant Anopheles mosquito, the size of a dragon-fly, spat through the air
past his face, then dived down towards the floating jetty where Kerans'
catamaran was moored. The sun was still hidden behind the vegetation on the
eastern side of the lagoon, but the mounting heat was bringing the huge
vicious insects out of their lairs all over the moss-covered surface of the hotel.
Kerans was reluctant to leave the balcony and retreat behind the wiremesh
enclosure. In the early morning light a strange mournful beauty hung over the
lagoon; the somber green-black fronds of the gymnosperms, intruders from
the Triassic past, and the half-submerged white-faced buildings of the 20th
century still reflected together in the dark mirror of the water, the two
interlocking worlds apparently suspended at some junction in time, the
illusion momentarily broken when a giant water spider cleft the oily surface a
hundred yards away.
In the distance, somewhere beyond the drowned bulk of a large Gothic
10
building half a mile to the south, a diesel engine coughed and surged. Kerans
left the balcony, closing the wire door behind him, and went into the
bathroom to shave. Water had long ceased to flow through the taps, but
Kerans maintained a reservoir in the plunge bath, carefully purified in a
home-made still on the roof and piped in through the window.
Although he was only forty, Kerans' beard had been turned white by the
radio-fluorine in the water, but his bleached crew-cut hair and deep amber tan
made him appear at least ten years younger. A chronic lack of appetite, and
the new malarias, had shrunk the dry leathery skin under his cheekbones,
emphasising the ascetic cast of his face. As he shaved he examined his
features critically, feeling the narrowing planes with his fingers, kneading the
altered musculature which was slowly transforming its contours and revealing
a personality that had remained latent during his previous adult life. Despite
his introspective manner, he now seemed more relaxed and equable than he
could remember, his cool blue eyes surveying himself with ironic detachment.
The slightly self-conscious absorption in his own world, with its private rituals
and observances, had passed. If he kept himself aloof from Riggs and his men
this was simply a matter of convenience rather than of misanthropy.
On the way out he picked a monographed cream silk shirt from the stack
left in the wardrobe by the financier, and slipped into a pair of neatly pressed
slacks with a Zurich label. Sealing the double doors behind him-the suite was
effectively a glass box inside the outer brick walls-he made his way down the
staircase.
He reached the landing stage as Colonel Riggs' cutter, a converted landing
craft, pulled in against the catamaran. Riggs stood in the bows, a trim dapper
figure, one booted foot up on the ramp, surveying the winding creeks and
hanging jungles like an old-time African explorer.
"Good morning, Robert," he greeted Kerans, jumping down on to the
11
swaying platform of fifty-gallon drums lashed inside a wooden frame. "Glad
you're still here. I've got a job on my hands you can help me with. Can you
take the day off from the station?"
Kerans helped him on to the concrete balcony that had once jutted from a
seventh-floor suite. "Of course, Colonel. As a matter of fact, I have already."
Technically Riggs had overall authority for the testing station and Kerans
should have asked his permission, but the relationship between the two men
was without ceremony. They had worked together for over three years, as the
testing station and its military escort moved slowly northward through the
European lagoons, and Riggs was content to let Kerans and Bodkin get on
with their work in their own fashion, sufficiently busy himself with the jobs of
mapping the shifting keys and harbours and evacuating the last inhabitants. In
the latter task he often needed Kerans' help, for most of the people still living
on in the sinking cities were either psychopaths or suffering from malnutrition
and radiation sickness.
In addition to running the testing station, Kerans served as the unit's
medical officer. Many of the people they came across required immediate
hospitalisation before being flown out in the helicopter to one of the large
tank-landing craft ferrying refugees up to Camp Byrd. Injured military
personnel marooned on an office block in a deserted swamp, dying recluses
unable to separate their own identities from the cities where they had spent
their lives, disheartened freebooters who had stayed behind to dive for loot-all
these Riggs good-humouredly but firmly helped back to safety, Kerans ready
at his elbow to administer an analgesic or tranquilliser. Despite his brisk
military front, Kerans found the Colonel intelligent and sympathetic, and with
a concealed reserve of droll humour. Sometimes he wondered whether to test
this by telling the Colonel about Bodkin's Pelycosaur, but on the whole
decided against it.
12
The sergeant concerned in the hoax, a dour conscientious Scotsman called
Macready, had climbed up onto the wire cage that enclosed the deck of the
cutter and was carefully sweeping away the heavy fronds and vines strewn
across it. None of the three other men tried to help him; under their heavy
tans their faces looked pinched and drawn, and they sat inertly in a row
against a bulkhead. The continuous heat and the massive daily doses of
antibiotics drained all energy from them.
As the sun rose over the lagoon, driving clouds of steam into the great
golden pall, Kerans felt the terrible stench of the water-line, the sweet
compacted smells of dead vegetation and rotting animal carcases. Huge flies
spun by, bouncing off the wire cage of the cutter, and giant bats raced across
the heating water towards their eyries in the ruined buildings. Beautiful and
serene from his balcony a few minutes earlier, Kerans realised that the lagoon
was nothing more than a garbage-filled swamp.
"Let's go up onto the deck," he suggested to Riggs, lowering his voice so
that the others would not hear. "I'll buy you a drink."
"Good man. I'm glad to see you've really caught on to the grand manner."
Riggs shouted at Macready: "Sergeant, I'm going up to see if I can get the
Doctor's distillation unit to work." He winked at Kerans as Macready
acknowledged this with a skeptical nod, but the subterfuge was harmless.
Most of the men carried hip-flasks, and once they secured the sergeant's
grudging approval they would bring them out and settle down placidly until
the Colonel returned.
Kerans climbed over the window-sill into the bedroom overlooking the
jetty. 'What's your problem, Colonel?"
"It's not my problem. If anything, in fact, it's yours."
They trudged up the staircase, Riggs slapping with his baton at the vines
13
entwined around the rail. "Haven't you got the elevator working yet? I always
thought this place was over-rated." However, be smiled appreciatively when
they stepped into the clear ivorycool air of the penthouse, and sat down
thankfully in one of the gilt-legged Louis XV armchairs. "Well, this is very
gracious. You know, Robert, I think you have a natural talent for
beachcombing. I may move in here with you. Any vacancies?"
Kerans shook his head, pressing a tab in the wall and waiting as the cocktail
bar disgorged itself from a fake bookcase. "Try the Hilton. The service is
better."
The reply was jocular, but much as he liked Riggs he preferred to see as
little of him as possible. At present they were separated by the intervening
lagoons, and the constant clatter of the galley and armoury at the base were
safely muffled by the jungle. Although he had known each of the twenty men
in the unit for at least a couple of years, with the exception of Riggs and
Sergeant Macready, and a few terse grunts and questions in the sickbay, he
had spoken to none of them for six months. Even his contacts with Bodkin
he kept to a minimum. By mutual consent the two biologists had dispensed
with the usual pleasantries and small-talk that had sustained them for the first
two years during their sessions of cataloguing and slide preparation at the
laboratory.
This growing isolation and self-containment, exhibited by the other
members of the unit and from which only the buoyant Riggs seemed immune,
reminded Kerans of the slackening metabolism and biological withdrawal of
all animal forms about to undergo a major metamorphosis. Sometimes he
wondered what zone of transit he himself was entering, sure that his own
withdrawal was symptomatic not of a dormant schizophrenia, but 0f a careful
preparation for a radically new environment, with its own internal landscape
and logic, where old categories of thought would merely be an encumbrance.
14
He handed a large Scotch to Riggs, then took his own over to the desk,
self-consciously removed some of the books stacked over the radio console.
"Ever try listening to that thing?" Riggs asked, playfully introducing a hint
of reproof into his voice.
"Never," Kerans said. "Is there any point? We know all the news for the
next three million years."
"You don't. Really, you should switch it on just now and then. Hear all
sorts of interesting things." He put his drink down and sat forward. "For
example, this morning you would have heard that exactly three days from
now we're packing up and leaving for good." He nodded when Kerans looked
around in surprise. "Came through last night from Byrd. Apparently the water
level is still rising, all the work we've done has been a total waste-as I've
always maintained, incidentally. The American and Russian units are being
recalled as well. Temperatures at the Equator are up to one hundred and
eighty degrees now, going up steadily, and the rain belts are continuous as
high as the 20th parallel. There's more silt too-"
He broke off, watching Kerans speculatively. 'What's the matter? Aren't
you relieved to be going?"
"Of course," Kerans said automatically. He was holding an empty glass,
and walked across the room, intending to put it on the bar, instead found
himself absent-mindedly touching the clock over the mantelpiece. He seemed
to be searching the room for something. "Three days, you said?"
"What do you want-three million?" Riggs grinned broadly. "Robert, I think
you secretly want to stay behind."
Kerans reached the bar and filled his glass, collecting himself. He had only
managed to survive the monotony and boredom of the previous year by
15
deliberately suspending himself outside the normal world of time and space,
and the abrupt return to earth had momentarily disconcerted him. In addition,
he knew, there were other motives and responsibilities.
"Don't be absurd," he replied easily. "I simply hadn't realised that we might
withdraw at such short notice. Naturally I'm glad to be going. Though I admit
I have enjoyed being here." He gestured at the suite around them. "Perhaps it
appeals to my fin de siecle temperament. Up at Camp Byrd I'll be living in
half a mess tin. The nearest I'll ever get to this sort of thing will be 'Bouncing
with Beethoven' on the local radio show."
Riggs roared at this display of disgruntled humour, then stood up,
buttoning his tunic. "Robert, you're a strange one."
Kerans finished his drink abruptly. "Look, Colonel, I don't think I'll be able
to help you this morning after all. Something rather urgent has come up." He
noticed Riggs nodding slowly. "Oh, I see. That was your problem. My
problem."
"Right. I saw her last night, and again this morning after the news came
through. You'll have to convince her, Robert. At present she refuses pointblank
to go. She doesn't realise that this time is the end, that there'll be no
more holding units. She may be able to hang on for another six months, but
next March, when the rain belts reach here, we won't even be able to get a
helicopter in. Anyway, by then no-one will care. I told her that and she just
walked away."
Kerans smiled bleakly, visualising the familiar swirl of hip and haughty
stride. "Beatrice can be difficult sometimes," he temporised, hoping that she
hadn't offended Riggs. It would probably take more than three days to change
her mind and he wanted to be sure that the Colonel would still be waiting.
"She's a complex person, lives on many levels. Until they all synchronise she
can behave as if she's insane."
16
They left the suite, Kerans sealing the air-locks and setting the thermostat
alarms so that the air would be a pleasant eighty degrees in two hours' time.
They made their way down to the landing stage, Riggs pausing occasionally to
savour the cool gilded air in one of the public drawing rooms overlooking the
lagoon, hissing at the snakes which glided softly among the damp, funguscovered
settees. They stepped into the cutter and Macready slammed the door
of the cage behind them.
Five minutes later, the catamaran gliding and swirling behind the cutter,
they set off from the hotel across the lagoon. Golden waves glimmered up
into the boiling air, the ring of massive plants around them seeming to dance
in the heat gradients like a voodoo jungle.
Riggs peered somberly through the cage. "Thank God for that signal from
Byrd. We should have got out years ago. All this detailed mapping of
harbours for use in some hypothetical future is absurd. Even if the solar flares
subside it will be ten years before there's any serious attempt to re-occupy
these cities. By then most of the bigger buildings will have been smothered
under the silt. It'll take a couple of divisions to clear the jungle away from this
lagoon alone. Bodkin was telling me this morning that already some of the
canopies-of non-lignified plants, mark you-are over two hundred feet high.
The whole place is nothing but a confounded zoo."
He took off his peaked cap and rubbed his forehead, then shouted across
the mounting roar of the two outboard diesels: "If Beatrice stays here much
longer she will be insane. By the way, that reminds me of another reason why
we've got to get out." He glanced across at the tall lonely figure of Sergeant
Macready at the tiller, staring fixedly at the breaking water, and at the pinched
haunted faces of the other men. "Tell me, Doctor, how do you sleep these
days?"
Puzzled, Kerans turned to look at the Colonel, wondering whether the
17
question obliquely referred to his relationship with Beatrice Dahl. Riggs
watched him with his bright intelligent eyes, baton flexed between his neat
hands. "Very soundly," he replied carefully. "Never better. Why do you ask?"
But Riggs merely nodded and began to shout instructions at Macready.
18
2 - The Coming of the Iguanas
Screeching like a dispossessed banshee, a large hammer-nosed bat soared
straight out of one of the narrow inlets off the creek and swerved straight
toward the cutter. Its sonar confused by the labyrinth of giant webs spun
across the inlet by the colonies of wolf spiders, it missed the wire hood above
Kerans' head by only a few feet, and then sailed away along the line of
submerged office blocks, gliding in and out of the huge sail-like fronds of the
fern trees sprouting from their roofs. Suddenly, as it passed one of the
projecting cornices, a motionless stone-headed creature snapped out and
plucked the bat from the air. There was a brief piercing squawk and Kerans
caught a glimpse of the crushed wings clamped in the lizard's jaws. Then the
reptile shrank back invisibly among the foliage.
All the way down the creek, perched in the windows of the office blocks
and department stores, the iguanas watched them go past, their hard frozen
heads jerking stiffly. They launched themselves into the wake of the cutter,
snapping at the insects dislodged from the air-weed and rotting logs, then
swam through the windows and clambered up the staircases to their former
vantage points, piled three deep across each other. Without the reptiles, the
lagoons and the creeks of office blocks half-submerged in the immense heat
would have had a strange dream-like beauty, but the iguanas and basilisks
brought the fantasy down to earth. As their seats in the one-time boardrooms
indicated, the reptiles had taken over the city. Once again they were the
dominant form of life.
Looking up at the ancient impassive faces, Kerans could understand the
curious fear they roused, rekindling archaic memories of the terrifying jungles
of the Paleocene, when the reptiles had gone down before the emergent
mammals, and sense the implacable hatred one zoological class feels towards
another that usurps it.
19
At the end of the creek they entered the next lagoon, a wide circle of dark
green water almost half a mile in diameter. A lane of red plastic buoys marked
a channel towards an opening on the far side. The cutter had a draught of
little more than a foot, and as they moved along through the flat water, the
sun slanting down behind them opening up the submerged depths, they could
see the clear outlines of five- and six-storey buildings looming like giant
ghosts, here and there a moss-covered roof breaking the surface as the swell
rolled past it.
Sixty feet below the cutter a straight grey promenade stretched away
between the buildings, the remains of some former thoroughfare, the rusting
humped shells of cars still standing by the curb. Many of the lagoons in the
centre of the city were surrounded by an intact ring of buildings, and
consequently little silt had entered them. Free of vegetation, apart from a few
drifting clumps of Sargasso weed, the streets and shops had been preserved
almost intact, like a reflection in a lake that has somehow lost its original.
The bulk of the city had long since vanished, and only the steel-supported
buildings of the central commercial and financial areas had survived the
encroaching flood waters. The brick houses and single-storey factories of the
suburbs had disappeared completely below the drifting tides of silt. Where
these broke surface giant forests reared up into the burning dull-green sky,
smothering the former wheatfields of temperate Europe and North America.
Impenetrable Matto Grossos sometimes three hundred feet high, they were a
nightmare world of competing organic forms returning rapidly to their
Paleozoic past, and the only avenues of transit for the United Nations military
units were through the lagoon systems that had superimposed themselves on
the former cities. But even these were now being clogged with silt and then
submerged.
Kerans could remember the unending succession of green twilights that
had settled behind them as he and Riggs moved slowly northward across
20
Europe, leaving one city after another, the miasmic vegetation swamping the
narrow canals and crowding from rooftop to rooftop.
Now they were to abandon yet another city. Despite the massive
construction of the main commercial buildings, it consisted of little more than
three principal lagoons, surrounded by a nexus of small lakes fifty yards in
diameter and a network of narrow creeks and inlets which wound off, roughly
following the original street-plan of the city, into the outlying jungle. Here and
there they vanished altogether or expanded into the steaming sheets of open
water that were the residues of the former oceans. In turn these gave way to
the archipelagoes that coalesced to form the solid jungles of the southern
massif.
The military base set up by Riggs and his platoon, which harboured the
biological testing station, was in the most southerly of the three lagoons,
sheltered by a number of the tallest buildings of the city, thirty-storey blocks
in what had once been the down-town financial sector.
As they crossed the lagoon the yellow-striped drum of the floating base was
on its sun-ward side, almost obscured in the reflected light, the rotating blades
of the helicopter on its roof throwing brilliant lances across the smaller whitepainted
hull of the biological testing water at them. Two hundred yards down
shore was the smaller white-pointed hull of the biological testing station,
moored against a broad hump-backed building which had formerly been a
concert hall.
Kerans gazed up at the rectangular cliffs, enough of the windows intact to
remind him of the illustrations of sun-dazzled promenades at Nice, Rio and
Miami he had read about as a child in the encyclopaedias at Camp Byrd.
Curiously, though, despite the potent magic of the lagoon worlds and the
drowned cities, he had never felt any interest in their contents, and never
bothered to identify which of the cities he was stationed in.
21
Dr. Bodkin, twenty-five years his senior, had actually lived in several of
them, both in Europe and America, and spent most of his spare time punting
around the remoter water-ways, searching out former libraries and museums.
Not that they contained anything other than his memories.
Perhaps it was this absence of personal memories that made Kerans
indifferent to the spectacle of these sinking civilisations. He had been born
and brought up entirely within what had once been known as the Arctic
Circle-now a sub-tropical zone with an annual mean temperature of eightyfive
degrees-and had come southward only on joining one of the ecological
surveys in his early 30's. The vast swamps and jungles had been a fabulous
laboratory, the submerged cities little more than elaborate pedestals.
Apart from a few older men such as Bodkin there was no-one who
remembered living in them-and even during Bodkin's childhood the cities had
been beleaguered citadels, hemmed in by enormous dykes and disintegrated
by panic and despair, reluctant Venices to their marriage with the sea. Their
charm and beauty lay precisely in their emptiness, in the strange junction of
two extremes of nature, like a discarded crown overgrown by wild orchids.
The succession of gigantic geophysical upheavals which had transformed
the Earth's climate had made their first impact some sixty or seventy years
earlier. A series of violent and prolonged solar storms lasting several years
caused by a sudden instability in the Sun had enlarged the Van Allen belts and
diminished the Earth's gravitational hold upon the outer layers of the
ionosphere. As these vanished into space, depleting the Earth's barrier against
the full impact of solar radiation, temperatures began to climb steadily, the
heated atmosphere expanding outwards into the ionosphere where the cycle
was completed.
All over the world, mean temperatures rose by a few degrees each year. The
majority of tropical areas rapidly became uninhabitable, entire populations
22
migrating north or south from temperatures of a hundred and thirty and a
hundred and forty degrees. Once-temperate areas became tropical, Europe
and North America sweltering under continuous heat waves, temperatures
rarely falling below a hundred degrees. Under the direction of the United
Nations, the colonisation began of the Antarctic plateau and of the northern
borders of the Canadian and Russian continents.
Over this initial period of twenty years a gradual adjustment of life took
place to meet the altered climate. A slackening of the previous tempo was
inevitable, and there was little spare energy available to cut back the
encroaching jungles of the equatorial region. Not only was the growth of all
plant forms accelerated, but the higher levels of radioactivity increased the
rate at which mutations occurred. The first freak botanical forms appeared,
recalling the giant tree-ferns of the Carboniferous period, and there was a
drastic upsurge of all lower plant and animal forms.
The arrival of these distant forbears was overlayed by the second major
geophysical upheaval. The continued heating of the atmosphere had begun to
melt the polar ice-caps. The entrained ice-seas of the Antarctic plateau broke
and dissolved, tens of thousands of glaciers around the Arctic Circle, from
Greenland and Northern Europe, Russia and North America, poured
themselves into the sea, millions of acres of permafrost liquefied into gigantic
rivers.
Here again the rise of global water levels would have been little more than
a few feet, but the huge discharging channels carried with them billions of
tons of top-soil. Massive deltas formed at their mouths, extending the
continental coastlines and damming up the oceans. Their effective spread
shrank from two-thirds of the world's area to only slightly more than half.
Driving the submerged silt before them, the new seas completely altered
the shape and contours of the continents. The Mediterranean contracted into
23
a system of inland lakes, the British Isles was linked again with northern
France. The Middle West of the United States, filled by the Mississippi as it
drained the Rocky Mountains, became an enormous gulf opening into the
Hudson Bay, while the Caribbean Sea was transformed into a desert of silt
and salt flats. Europe became a system of giant lagoons, centered on the
principal low-lying cities, inundated by the silt carried southwards by the
expanding rivers.
During the next thirty years the pole-ward migration of populations
continued. A few fortified cities defied the rising waterlevels and the
encroaching jungles, building elaborate sea-walls around their perimeters, but
one by one these were breached. Only within the former Arctic and Antarctic
Circles was life tolerable. The oblique incidence of the Sun's rays provided a
shield against the more powerful radiation. Cities on higher ground in
mountainous areas nearer the Equator had been abandoned despite their
cooler temperatures because of the diminished atmospheric protection.
It was this last factor which provided its own solution to the problem of resettling
the migrant populations of the new Earth. The steady decline in
mammalian fertility, and the growing ascendancy of amphibian and reptile
forms best adapted to an aquatic life in the lagoons and swamps, inverted the
ecological balances, and by the time of Kerans' birth at Camp Byrd, a city of
ten thousand in Northern Greenland, it was estimated that fewer than five
million people were still living on the polar caps.
The birth of a child had become a comparative rarity, and only one
marriage in ten yielded any offspring. As Kerans sometimes reminded
himself, the genealogical tree of mankind was systematically pruning itself,
apparently moving backwards in time, and a point might ultimately be reached
where a second Adam and Eve found themselves alone in a new Eden.
Riggs noticed him smiling to himself at this conceit. "What's amusing you,
24
Robert? Another of your obscure jokes? Don't try to explain it to me."
"I was just casting myself in a new role." Kerans looked out over the ramp
at the office blocks sliding past twenty feet away, the wash from the cutter
splashing through the open windows along the water-line. The sharp tang of
wet lime contrasted freshly with the over-sweet odours of the vegetation.
Macready had taken them into the shadow of the buildings and it was
pleasantly cool behind the breaking spray.
Across the lagoon he could see the portly bare-chested figure of Dr.
Bodkin on the starboard bridge of the testing station, the Paisley
cummerbund around his waist and the green celluloid shade shielding his eyes
making him look like a riverboat gambler on his morning off. He was
plucking the orange-sized berries from the ferns overhanging the station and
tossing them up at the chittering marmosets dangling from the branches
above his head, egging them on with playful shouts and whistles. Fifty feet
away, on a projecting cornice, a trio of iguanas watched with stony
disapproval, whipping their tails slowly from side to side in a gesture of
impatience.
Macready swung the tiller, and they pivoted in a fan of spray into the lee of
a tall white-faced building which lifted a full twenty storeys out of the water.
The roof of an adjacent smaller block served as a jetty, next to which was
moored a rusty white-hulled power cruiser. The raked perspex windows of
the driving cabin were cracked and stained, and the exhaust vents leaked a
scaly oil onto the water.
As the cutter jockeyed in behind the power cruiser under Macready's expert
hand, they clambered over to the wire door, jumped down onto the jetty and
crossed a narrow metal gangway that led into the apartment block. The walls
of the corridor were slick with moisture, huge patches of mould feeding on
the plaster, but the elevator was still working, powered by an emergency
25
diesel. They rose slowly towards the roof, and stepped out on to the upper
level of the duplex, then walked down a service corridor to the outer deck.
Directly below them was the lower level, a small swimming pool with a
covered patio, bright deck chairs drawn up in the shade by the diving board.
Yellow venetian blinds masked the windows around three sides of the pool,
but through the vanes they could see the cool shadows in the interior lounge,
the glint of cut-glass and silver on the occasional tables. In the dim light under
the striped blue awning at the rear of the patio was a long chromium counter,
as inviting as an air-conditioned bar seen from a dusty street, glasses and
decanters reflected in a diamond-paned mirror. Everything in this private
haven seemed clean and discreet, thousands of miles away from the fly-blown
vegetation and tepid jungle water twenty storeys below.
Beyond the far end of the pool, screened by an ornamental balcony, was a
wide open view of the lagoon, the city emerging from the encroaching jungle,
flat sheets of silver water expanding towards the green blur along the
southern horizon. Massive silt banks lifted their backs through the surface, a
light yellow fur along their spines marking the emergence of the first giant
bamboo groves.
The helicopter rose from its platform on the roof of the base and arced
upwards into the air towards them, the pilot swinging the tail as he changed
direction, then roared overhead, two men in the open hatchway searching the
rooftops with binoculars.
Beatrice Dahl lay back on one of the deck chairs, her long oiled body
gleaming in the shadows like a sleeping python. The pink-tipped fingers of
one hand rested lightly on an ice-filled glass on a table beside her, while the
other hand turned slowly through the pages of a magazine. Wide blue-black
sunglasses hid her smooth sleek face, but Kerans noted the slightly sullen
pout of her firm lower lip. Presumably Riggs had annoyed her, forcing her to
26
accept the logic of his argument.
The Colonel paused at the rail, looking down at the beautiful supple body
with ungrudging approval. Noticing him, Beatrice pulled off her sunglasses,
then tightened the loose back-straps of her bikini under her arms. Her eyes
glinted quietly.
"All right, you two, get on with it. I'm not a strip show."
Riggs chuckled and trotted down the white metal stairway, Kerans at his
heels, wondering how he was going to persuade Beatrice to leave her private
sanctuary.
"My dear Miss Dahl, you should be flattered that I keep coming to see
you," Riggs told her, lifting back the awning and sitting down on one of the
chairs. "Besides, as the military governor of this area-" here he winked
playfully at Kerans "-I have certain responsibilities towards you. And vice
versa."
Beatrice regarded him briefly with a jaundiced eye and reached out to turn
up the volume of the radiogram behind her. "Oh God…" She muttered some
further, less polite imprecation under her breath and looked up at Kerans.
"And what about you, Robert? What brings you out so early in the day?"
Kerans shrugged, smiling at her amiably. "I missed you."
"Good boy. I thought perhaps that the gauleiter here had been trying to
frighten you with his horror stories."
"Well, he has, as a matter of fact." Kerans took the magazine propped
against Beatrice's knee and leafed through it idly. It was a forty-year-old issue
of Paris Vogue, from its icy pages evidently kept somewhere in cold storage.
He dropped it on the green-tiled floor. "Bea, it looks as if we'll all have to
27
leave here in a couple of days' time. The Colonel and his men are pulling out
for good. We can't very well stay on after he's gone."
"We?" she repeated dryly. "I didn't know there was any chance of your
staying behind?"
Kerans glanced involuntarily at Riggs, who was watching him steadily.
"There isn't," he said firmly. "You know what I mean. There'll be a lot to do
in the next forty-eight hours, try not to complicate things by making a last
emotional stand."
Before the girl could cut back at Kerans, Riggs added smoothly: "The
temperature is still going up, Miss Dahl, you won't find it easy to stand one
hundred and thirty degrees when the fuel for your generator runs out. The big
Equatorial rain belts are moving northward, and they'll be here in a couple of
months. When they leave, and the cloud cover goes, the water in that pool-"
he indicated the tank of steaming, insect-strewn fluid "-will damn nearly boil.
What with the Type X Anopheles, skin cancers and the iguanas shrieking all
night down below, you'll get precious little sleep." Closing his eyes, he added
pensively: "That is, assuming that you still want any."
At this last remark the girl's mouth fretted slightly. Kerans realised that the
quiet ambiguity in Riggs' voice when he asked how the biologist slept had not
been directed at his relationship with Beatrice.
The Colonel went on: "In addition, some of the human scavengers driven
northward out of the Mediterranean lagoons won't be too easy to deal with."
Beatrice tossed her long black hair over one shoulder. "I'll keep the door
locked, Colonel."
Irritated, Kerans snapped: "For God's sake, Beatrice, what are you trying to
prove? These self-destructive impulses may be amusing to play with now, but
28
when we've gone they won't be so funny. The Colonel's only trying to help
you-he doesn't really give a hoot whether you stay behind or not."
Riggs let out a brief laugh. 'Well, I wouldn't say that. But if the thought of
my personal concern worries you so much, Miss Dahl, you can just put it
down to my over-developed sense of duty."
"That's interesting, Colonel," Beatrice commented sarcastically. "I've always
understood that our duty was to stay on here as long as possible and make
every sacrifice necessary to that end. Or at least-" here the familiar gleam of
sharp humour crossed her eyes "-that was the reason my grandfather was
given when the government confiscated most of his property." She noticed
Riggs peering over his shoulder at the bar. "What's the matter, Colonel?
Looking for your punkahwallah? I'm not going to get you a drink, if that's
what you're after. I think you men only come up here to booze."
Riggs stood up. "All right, Miss Dahl. I give in. I'll see you later, Doctor."
He saluted Beatrice with a smile. "Some time tomorrow I'll send the cutter
over to collect your gear, Miss Dahl."
When Riggs had gone Kerans lay back in his chair, watching the helicopter
circle over the adjacent lagoon. Now and then it dived along the water's edge,
the down-draught from its rotor blades beating through the flapping fronds
of the fern trees, driving the iguanas across the rooftops. Beatrice brought a
drink from the bar and sat down on the chair at his feet.
"I wish you wouldn't analyse me in front of that man, Robert." She handed
him the drink and then leaned against his knees, resting her chin on one wrist.
Usually she looked sleek and well-fed, but her expression today seemed tired
and wistful.
"I'm sorry," Kerans apologised. "Perhaps I was really analysing myself.
Riggs' ultimatum came as a bit of a surprise; I wasn't expecting to leave so
29
soon."
"You are going to leave then?"
Kerans paused. The automatic player in the radiogram switched from
Beethoven's Pastoral to the Seventh, Toscanini giving way to Bruno Walter.
All day, without a break, it played through the cycle of nine symphonies. He
searched for an answer, the change of mood, to the somber opening motif of
the Seventh, overlaying his indecision.
"I suppose I want to, but I haven't yet found an adequate reason. Satisfying
one's emotional needs isn't enough. There's got to be a more valid motive.
Perhaps these sunken lagoons simply remind me of the drowned world of my
uterine childhood-if so, the best thing is to leave straight away. Everything
Riggs says is true. There's little hope of standing up to the rainstorms and the
malaria."
He placed his hand on her forehead, feeling her temperature like a child.
"What did Riggs mean when he said you wouldn't sleep well? That was the
second time this morning he mentioned it."
Beatrice looked away for a moment. "Oh, nothing. I've just had one or two
peculiar nightmares recently. A lot of people get them… Forget it. Tell me,
Robert, seriously-if I decide to stay on here, would you? You could share this
apartment."
Kerans grinned. "Trying to tempt me, Bea? What a question. Remember,
not only are you the most beautiful woman here, but you're the only woman.
Nothing is more essential than a basis for comparison. Adam had no aesthetic
sense, or he would have realised that Eve was a pretty haphazard piece of
work."
"You are being frank today." Beatrice stood up and went over to the edge
30
of the pool. She swept her hair back off her forehead with both hands, her
long supple body gleaming against the sunlight. "But is there as much urgency
as Riggs claims? We've got the cruiser."
"It's a wreck. The first serious storm will split it open like a rusty can.
Nearing noon, the heat on the terrace had become uncomfortable and they
left the patio and went indoors. Double venetian blinds filtered a thin sunlight
into the low wide lounge, and the refrigerated air was cool and soothing.
Beatrice stretched out on a long pale-blue elephant-hide sofa, one hand
playing with the fleecy pile of the carpet. The apartment had been one of her
grandfather's pied a terres, and Beatrice's home since her parents' death
shortly after her birth. She had been brought up under the supervision of the
grandfather, who had been a lonely, eccentric tycoon (the sources of his
wealth Kerans had never established; when he asked Beatrice, shortly after he
and Riggs stumbled upon her penthouse eyrie, she replied succinctly: "Let's
say he was in money") and a great patron of the arts in his earlier days. His
tastes leaned particularly towards the experimental and bizarre, and Kerans
often wondered how far his personality and its strange internal perspectives
had been carried forward into his granddaughter. Over the mantelpiece was a
huge painting by the early 20th century surrealist Delvaux, in which ashenfaced
women danced naked to the waist with dandified skeletons in tuxedos
against a spectral bonelike landscape. On another wall one of Max Ernst's
self-devouring phantasmagoric jungles screamed silently to itself, like the
sump of some insane unconscious.
For a few moments Kerans stared quietly at the dim yellow annulus of
Ernst's sun glowering through the exotic vegetation, a curious feeling of
memory and recognition signaling through his brain. Far more potent than
the Beethoven, the image of the archaic sun burned against his mind,
illuminating the fleeting shadows that darted fitfully through its profoundest
deeps.
31
"Beatrice."
She looked up at him as he walked across to her, a light frown crossing her
eyes. "What's the matter, Robert?"
Kerans hesitated, suddenly aware that, however brief and imperceptible, a
moment of significant time had elapsed, carrying him forward with its passage
into a zone of commitment from which he would not be able to withdraw.
"You realise that if we let Riggs go without us we don't merely leave here
later. We stay."
32
3 - Towards a New Psychology
Berthing the catamaran against the landing stage, Kerans shipped the
outboard and then made his way up the gangway into the base. As he let
himself through the screen hatch he looked back over his shoulder across the
lagoon, and caught a brief glimpse through the heat waves of Beatrice
standing at her balcony rail. When he waved, however, she characteristically
turned away without responding.
"One of her moody days, Doctor?" Sergeant Macready stepped from the
guard cubicle, a trace of humour relaxing his beak-like face. "She's a strange
one, all right."
Kerans shrugged. "These tough bachelor girls, you know, Sergeant. If
you're not careful they frighten the wits out of you. I've been trying to
persuade her to pack up and come with us. With a little luck I think she will."
Macready peered shrewdly at the distant roof of the apartment house. "I'm
glad to hear you say so, Doctor," he ventured noncommittally, but Kerans
was unable to decide if his skepticism was directed at Beatrice or himself.
Whether or not they finally stayed behind, Kerans had resolved to maintain
the pretense that they were leaving-every spare minute of the next three days
would be needed to consolidate their supplies and steal whatever extra
equipment they required from the base stores. Kerans had still not made up
his mind-once away from Beatrice his indecision returned (ruefully he
wondered if she was deliberately trying to confuse him, Pandora with her
killing mouth and witch's box of desires and frustrations, unpredictably
opening and shutting the lid)-but rather than stumble about in a state of
tortured uncertainty, which Riggs and Bodkin would soon diagnose, he
decided to postpone a final reckoning until the last moment possible. Much as
he loathed the base, he knew that the sight of it actually sailing off would act
33
as a wonderful catalyst for emotions of fear and panic, and any more abstract
motives for staying behind would soon be abandoned. A year earlier, he had
been accidentally marooned on a small key while taking an unscheduled
geomagnetic reading, the departure siren muffled by his headphones as he
crouched over his instruments in an old basement bunker. When he emerged
ten minutes later and found the base six hundred yards away across a
widening interval of flat water he had felt like a child parted forever from its
mother, barely managed to control his panic in time to fire a warning shell
from his flare pistol.
"Dr. Bodkin asked me to call you as soon as you arrived, sir. Lieutenant
Hardman hasn't been too happy this morning."
Kerans nodded, glancing up and down the empty deck. He had taken lunch
with Beatrice, knowing that the base was deserted in the afternoons. Half the
crew were away with either Riggs or the helicopter, the rest asleep in their
bunks, and he had hoped to carry out a private tour of the stores and
armoury. Now unluckily, Macready, the Colonel's ever-alert watch-dog, was
hanging about at his heels, ready to escort him up the companionway to the
sick-bay on B-Deck.
Kerans studiously examined a pair of Anopheles mosquitoes which bad
slipped through the wire hatch behind him. "They're still getting in," he
pointed out to Macready. 'What's happened to the double screening you were
supposed to be putting up?"
Swatting at the mosquitoes with his forage cap, Macready looked around
uncertainly. A secondary layer of screening around the wire mesh enclosing
the base had long been one of Colonel Riggs' pet projects. At times he would
tell Macready to detail a squad to carry out the work, but as this involved
sitting on a wooden trestle in the open sunlight in the centre of a cloud of
mosquitoes only a few token sections around Riggs' cabin had been
34
completed. Now that they were moving northward the utility of the project
had faded, but Macready's Presbyterian conscience, once roused, refused to
let him rest.
"I'll get the men on to it this evening, Doctor," he assured Kerans, pulling a
ball-pen and note-book from his hip pocket.
"No hurry, Sergeant, but if you've nothing better to do, I know the
Colonel's very keen." Kerans left him squinting along the metal louvres and
walked off along the deck. As soon as he was out of sight he stepped through
the first doorway.
C-Deck, the lowest of the three decks comprising the base, contained the
crew's quarters and galley. Two or three men lay about among their tropical
gear in the cabins, but the recreation room was empty, a radio playing to itself
by the table-tennis tournament board in the corner. Kerans paused, listening
to the strident rhythms of the guitar music, overlayed by the distant blare of
the helicopter circling over the next lagoon, then made his way down the
central stair-well which led to the armoury and workshops housed in the
pontoon.
Three-quarters of the hull was occupied by the 2,000 hp. diesels which
powered the twin screws, and by the oil and aviation fuel tanks, and the
workshops had been temporarily transferred during the final aerial sweeps to
two vacant offices on A-Deck, beside the officers' quarters, so that the
mechanics could service the helicopter with the maximum speed.
The armoury was closed when Kerans entered, a single light burning in the
tech, corporal's glass-walled booth. Kerans gazed around the heavy wooden
benches and cabinets lined with carbines and submachine-guns. Steel rods
through the trigger guards locked the weapons into their cases, and he idly
touched the heavy stocks, doubting whether he could handle any of the
weapons even if he stole one. In a drawer at the testing station was a Colt.45
35
and fifty rounds issued to him three years earlier. Once a year he made an
official return on the ammunition discharged-in his case none- and exchanged
the unused shells for a fresh issue, but he had never tried to fire the pistol.
On his way out he scanned the dark green ammunition boxes stacked
around the wall below the cabinets, all of them double padlocked. He was
passing the booth when the light through the door illuminated the dusty
labels on a row of metal cartons below one of the work benches.
'Hy-Dyne.' On an impulse Kerans stopped, pushed his fingers through the
wire cage and brushed the dust off a label, tracing the formula with his
fingers. 'Cyclotrime-thylenetrinitramine: Gas discharge speed-8,000
metres/second.'
Speculating on the possible uses of the explosive-it would be a brilliant tour
de force to sink one of the office buildings into the exit creek after Riggs had
left, blocking any attempt to return-he leaned his elbows on the bench,
playing absent-mindedly with a 4-inch-diameter brass compass that had been
left for repair. The calibrated annulus was loose and had been rotated a full
180 degrees, the point emphasised with a chalked cross.
Still thinking about the explosive, and the possibility of stealing detonators
and fuse-wire, Kerans rubbed away the blunt chalk marks and then lifted the
compass and weighed it in his hand. Leaving the armoury, he began to climb
the stairway, uncaging the compass and letting the pointer dance and float. A
sailor walked past along C-Deck, and Kerans quickly slipped the compass into
his jacket pocket.
Suddenly, as he visualised himself throwing his weight onto the handles of
a plunger box and catapulting Riggs, the base and the testing station into the
next lagoon, he stopped and steadied himself against the rail. Smiling ruefully
at the absurdity of the fantasy, he wondered why he had indulged it.
36
Then he noticed the heavy cylinder of the compass dragging at his jacket.
For a moment he peered down at it thoughtfully.
"Watch out, Kerans," he murmured to himself. "You're living on two
levels."
Five minutes later, when he entered the sick-bay on B-Deck, he found
more urgent problems facing him.
Three men were being treated for heat ulcers in the dispensary, but the
main twelve-bed ward was empty. Kerans nodded to the corporal issuing
penicillin band-aids and walked through to the small single ward on the
starboard side of the deck.
The door was closed, but as he turned the handle he could hear the restless
heaving motion of the cot, followed by a fractious muttering from the patient
and Dr. Bodkin's equable but firm reply. For a few moments the latter
continued to speak in a low even monologue, punctuated by a few shrugging
protests and concluded by an interval of tired silence.
Lieutenant Hardman, the senior pilot of the helicopter (now being flown
by his co-pilot, Sergeant Daley) was the only other commissioned member of
the survey unit, and until the last three months had served as Riggs' deputy
and chief executive officer. A burly, intelligent but somewhat phlegmatic man
of about 30, he had quietly kept himself apart from the other members of the
unit something of an amateur naturalist, he made his own descriptive notes of
the changing flora and fauna, employing a taxonomic system of his own
devising. In one of his few unguarded moments he had shown the notebooks
to Kerans, then abruptly withdrawn into himself when Kerans tactfully
pointed out that the classifications were confused.
For the first two years Hardman had been the perfect buffer between Riggs
and Kerans. The rest of the crew took their cue from the Lieutenant, and this
37
had the advantage, from Kerans' point of view, that the group never
developed that sense of happy cohesion a more extravert second-in-command
might have instilled, and which would have soon made life unbearable. The
loose fragmentary relationships aboard the base, where a replacement was
accepted as a fully paid up member of the crew within five minutes and noone
cared whether he had been there two days or two years, was largely a
reflection of Hardman's temperament. When he organised a basketball match
or a regatta out on the lagoon there was no self-conscious boisterousness, but
a laconic indifference to whether anyone took part or not.
Recently, however, the more somber elements in Hardman's personality
had begun to predominate. Two months earlier he complained to Kerans of
intermittent insomnia-often, from Beatrice Dahl's apartment, Kerans would
watch him long after midnight standing in the moonlight beside the helicopter
on the roof of the base, looking out across the silent lagoon-and then took
advantage of an attack of malaria to excuse himself from flying duty.
Confined to his cabin for up to a week on end, he steadily retreated into his
private world, going through his old note-books and running his fingers, like a
blind man reading Braille, across the glass display cases with their few
mounted butterflies and giant moths.
The malaise had not been difficult to diagnose. Kerans recognised the same
symptoms he had seen in himself, an accelerated entry Into his own 'zone of
transit', and left the Lieutenant alone, asking Bodkin to call in periodically.
Curiously, however, Bodkin had taken a more serious view of Hardman's
illness.
Pushing back the door, Kerans stepped quietly into the darkened room,
pausing in the corner by the ventilator shaft as Bodkin raised a monitory hand
towards him. The blinds over the windows were drawn, and to Kerans'
surprise the air-conditioning unit had been switched off. The air pumped in
38
through the ventilator was never more than twenty degrees below the ambient
temperature of the lagoon, and the air-conditioner normally kept the room at
an even 70 degrees. But Bodkin had not only switched this off but plugged a
small electric fire into the shaver socket over the hand basin mirror. Kerans
remembered him building the fire in the laboratory at the testing station,
fitting a dented paraboloid mirror around the single filament. Little more than
a couple of watts in strength, the fire seemed to emit an immense heat,
blazing out into the small room like a furnace mouth, and within a few
seconds Kerans felt the sweat gathering around his neck. Bodkin, sitting on
the metal bedside chair with his back to the fire, was still wearing his white
cotton jacket, stained by two wide patches of sweat that touched between his
shoulder blades, and in the dim red light Kerans could see the moisture
beading off his head like drops of white-hot lead.
Hardman lay slumped back on one elbow, his broad chest and shoulders
filling the backrest, big hands holding the leads of a pair of headphones
clasped to his ears. His narrow, large-jawed face was pointed towards Kerans,
but his eyes were fixed on the electric fire. Projected by the parabolic bowl, a
circular disc of intense red light three feet in diameter covered the wall of the
cabin, Hardman's head at its centre, like an enormous glowing halo.
A faint scratching noise came from a portable record player on the floor at
Bodkin's feet, a single three-inch disc spinning on its turntable. Generated
mechanically by the pick-up head, the almost imperceptible sounds of a deep
slow drumming reached Kerans, lost as the record ended and Bodkin
switched off the player. Quickly he jotted something down on a desk-pad,
then turned off the electric fire and put on the bedside lamp.
Shaking his head slowly, Hardman pulled off the headphones and handed
them to Bodkin.
"This is a waste of time, Doctor. These records are insane, you can put any
39
interpretation you like on them." He settled his heavy limbs uncomfortably in
the narrow cot. Despite the heat, there was little sweat on his face and bare
chest, and he watched the fading embers of the electric fire as if reluctant to
see them vanish.
Bodkin stood up and put the record player on his chair, wrapping the
headphones around the case. "Perhaps that's the point, Lieutenant-a sort of
aural Rorshach. I think the last record was the most evocative, don't you
agree?"
Hardman shrugged with studied vagueness, evidently reluctant to cooperate
with Bodkin and concede even the smallest point. But despite this Kerans felt
that he had been glad to take part in the experiment, using it for his own
purposes.
"Maybe," Hardman said grudgingly. "But I'm afraid it didn't suggest a
concrete image."
Bodkin smiled, aware of Hardman's resistance but prepared for the
moment to give in to him. "Don't apologise, Lieutenant; believe me, that was
our most valuable session so far." He waved to Kerans. "Come in, Robert,
I'm sorry it's so warm-Lieutenant Hardman and I have been conducting a
small experiment together. I'll tell you about it when we go back to the
station. Now-" he pointed to a contraption on the bedside table which
appeared to be two alarm clocks clipped back to back, crude metal extensions
from the hands interlocking like the legs of two grappling spiders "-keep this
thing running as long as you can, it shouldn't be too difficult, all you have to
do is re-set both alarms after each twelve-hour cycle. They'll wake you once
every ten minutes, just enough time for you to get sufficient rest before you
slide off the pre-conscious shelf into deep sleep. With luck there'll be no more
dreams."
Hardman smiled skeptically, glancing up briefly at Kerans. "I think you're
40
being over-optimistic, Doctor. What you really mean is that I won't be aware
of them." He picked up a well-thumbed green file, his botanical diary, and
began to turn the pages mechanically. "Sometimes I think I have the dreams
continuously, every minute of the day. Perhaps we all do."
His tone was relaxed and unhurried, despite the fatigue which had drained
the skin around his eyes and mouth, making his long Jaw seem even more
lantern-like. Kerans realised that the malaise, whatever its source, had barely
touched the central core of the man's ego. The element of tough selfsufficiency
in Hardman was as strong as ever, if anything stronger, like a steel
blade springing against a fencing post and revealing its sinews.
Bodkin dabbed at his face with a yellow silk handkerchief, watching
Hardman thoughtfully. His grimy cotton jacket and haphazard attire, coupled
with his puffy, quinine-tinted skin, misleadingly made him look like a seedy
quack, masking a sharp and unresting intelligence. "Perhaps you're right,
Lieutenant. In fact, some people used to maintain that consciousness is
nothing more than a special category of the cytoplasmic coma, that the
capacities of the central nervous system are as fully developed and extended
by the dream, life as they are during what we call the waking state. But we
have to adopt an empirical approach, try whatever remedy we can. Don't you
agree, Kerans?"
Kerans nodded. The temperature in the cabin had begun to fall, and he felt
himself breathing more freely. "A change of climate will probably help as
well." There was a dull clatter outside as one of the metal scows being hauled
up in its davits clanged against the hull. He added: "The atmosphere in these
lagoons is pretty enervating. Three days from now when we leave I think we'll
all show a marked improvement."
He assumed that Hardman had been told of their imminent departure, but
the Lieutenant looked up at him sharply, lowering his note-book Bodkin
41
began to clear his throat noisily and abruptly started talking about the danger
of draughts from the ventilator. For a few seconds Kerans and Hardman
watched each other steadily, and then the Lieutenant nodded briefly to
himself and resumed his reading, carefully noting the time from the bedside
clocks.
Angry with himself, Kerans went over to the window, his back turned to
the others. He realised that he had told Hardman deliberately, unconsciously
hoping to elicit precisely this response, and knowing full well why Bodkin had
withheld the news. Without the shadow of a doubt he had warned Hardman,
telling him that whatever tasks he had to carry out, whatever internal
perspectives to bring to a common focus, this should be completed within 3
days.
Kerans looked down irritably at the alarm device on the table, resenting his
diminishing control over his own motives. First the meaningless theft of the
compass, and now this act of gratuitous sabotage. However varied his faults,
in the past he had always believed them to be redressed by one outstanding
virtue-a complete and objective awareness of the motives behind his actions.
If he was sometimes prone to undue delays this was a result, not of
irresolution, but of a reluctance to act at all where complete selfawareness was
impossible-his affair with Beatrice Dahl, tilted by so many conflicting
passions, from day to day walked a narrow tightrope of a thousand restraints
and cautions.
In a belated attempt to re-assert himself, he said to Hardman: "Don't forget
the clock, Lieutenant. If I were you I'd set the alarm so that it rings
continuously."
Leaving the sick-bay, they made their way down to the jetty and climbed
into Kerans' catamaran. Too tired to start the motor, Kerans slowly pulled
them along the overhead hawzer stretched between the base and the testing
42
station. Bodkin sat in the bows, the record player held between his knees like
a briefcase, blinking in the bright sunlight that spangled the broken surface of
the sluggish green water. His plump face, topped by an untidy grey thatch,
seemed preoccupied and wistful, scanning the surrounding ring of halfsubmerged
buildings like a weary ship's chandler being rowed around a
harbour for the - very first time. As they neared the testing station the
helicopter roared in overhead and alighted, its impact tilting the base and
dipping the hawzer into the water, then tautening it and cascading a brief
shower across their shoulders. Bodkin cursed under his breath, but they were
dry within a few seconds. Although it was well after o'clock, the sun filled the
sky, turning it into an enormous blow-torch and forcing them to lower their
eyes to the water-line. Now and then, in the glass curtainwalling of the
surrounding buildings, they would see countless reflections of the sun move
across the surface in huge sheets of fire, like the blazing facetted eyes of
gigantic insects.
A two-storey drum some fifty feet in diameter, the testing station had a
dead weight of twenty tons. The lower deck contained the laboratory, the
upper the two biologists' quarters and the chartroom and offices. A small
bridge traversed the roof, and housed the temperature and humidity registers,
rainfall gauge and radiation counters. Clumps of dried air-weed and red kelp
were encrusted across the bitumened plates of the pontoon, shriveled and
burnt by the sun before they could reach the railing around the laboratory,
while a dense refuse-filled mass of sargassum and spirogyra cushioned their
impact as they reached the narrow jetty, oozing and subsiding like an
immense soggy raft.
They entered the cool darkness of the laboratory and sat down at their
desks below the semi-circle of fading program schedules which reached to the
ceiling behind the dais, looking down over the clutter of benches and fume
cupboards like a dusty mural. The schedules on the left, dating from their first
year of work, were packed with detailed entries and minutely labeled arrow
43
sprays, but those on the right thinned out progressively, until a few penciled
scrawls in giant longhand loops sealed off all but one or two of the ecological
corridors. Many of the cardboard screens had sprung off their drawing pins,
and hung forwards into the air like the peeling hull-plates of a derelict ship,
moored against its terminal pier and covered with gnomic and meaningless
graffiti.
Idly tracing a large compass dial with his finger in the dust on the desk-top,
Kerans waited for Bodkin to provide some explanation for his curious
experiments with Hardman. But Bodkin settled himself comfortably behind
the muddle of box-files and catalogue trays on his desk, then opened the
record player and removed the disc from the table, spinning it reflectively
between his hands.
Kerans began: "I'm sorry I let slip that we were leaving in three days' time.
I hadn't realised you'd kept that from Hardman."
Bodkin shrugged, dismissing this as of little importance. "It's a complex
situation, Robert. Having gone a few steps towards unraveling it I didn't want
to introduce another slip knot."
"But why not tell him?" Kerans pressed, hoping obliquely to absolve
himself of his slight feeling of guilt. "Surely the prospect of leaving might well
jolt him out of his lethargy?"
Bodkin lowered his glasses to the end of his nose and regarded Kerans
quizzically. "It doesn't seem to have had that effect on you, Robert. Unless
I'm very much mistaken you look rather un-jolted. Why should Hardman's
reactions be any different?"
Kerans smiled. "Touché, Alan. I don't want to interfere, having more or
less dropped Hardman into your lap, but what exactly are you and he playing
about with-the electric heater and alarm clocks?"
44
Bodkin slid the gramophone record into a rack of miniature discs the shelf
behind him. He looked up at Kerans and for a few moments watched him
with the mild but penetrating gaze with which he had observed Hardman, and
Kerans realised that their relationship, until now that of colleagues confiding
completely in each other, had become closer to that of observer and subject.
After a pause Bodkin glanced away at the program charts, and Kerans
chuckled involuntarily. To himself he said: Damn the old boy, he's got me up
there now with the algae and nautiloids, next he'll be playing his records at
me.
Bodkin stood up and pointed to the three rows of laboratory benches,
crowded with vivaria and specimen jars, pages from notebooks pinned to the
fume hoods above them.
"Tell me, Robert, if you had to sum up the last three years' work in a single
conclusion, how would you set about it?"
Kerans hesitated, then gestured off-handedly. "It wouldn't be too difficult."
He saw that Bodkin expected a serious answer, and composed his thoughts.
'Well, one could simply say that in response to the rises in temperature,
humidity and radiation levels the flora and fauna of this planet are beginning
to assume once again the forms they displayed the last time such conditions
were present-roughly speaking, the Triassic."
"Correct." Bodkin strolled off among the benches. "During the last three
years, Robert, you and I have examined something like five thousand species
in the animal kingdom, seen literally tens of thousands of new plant varieties.
Everywhere the same pattern has unfolded, countless mutations completely
transforming the organisms to adapt them for survival in the new
environment. Everywhere there's been the same avalanche backwards into the
past-so much so that the few complex organisms which have managed to
retain a foothold unchanged on the slope look distinctly anomalous-a handful
45
of amphibians, the birds, and Man. It's a curious thing that although we've
carefully catalogued the backward journeys of so many plants and animals,
we've ignored the most important creature on this planet."
Kerans laughed. "I'll willingly take a small bow there, Alan. But what are
you suggesting-that Homo sapiens is about to transform himself into Cro-
Magnon and Java Man, and ultimately into Sinanthropus? Unlikely, surely.
Wouldn't that merely be Lamarkism in reverse?"
"Agreed. I'm not suggesting that." Bodkin leaned against one of the
benches, feeding a handful of peanuts to a small marmoset caged in a
converted fume cupboard. "Though obviously after two or three hundred
million years Homo sapiens might well die out and our little cousin here
become the highest form of life on the planet. However, a biological process
isn't completely reversible." He pulled the silk handkerchief out of his pocket
and flicked it at the marmoset, which flinched away tremulously. "If we return
to the jungle we'll dress for dinner."
He went over to a window and gazed out through the mesh screen, the
overhang of the deck above shutting out all but a narrow band of the intense
sunlight. Steeped in the vast heat, the lagoon lay motionlessly, pails of steam
humped over the water like elephantine spectres.
"But I'm really thinking of something else. Is it only the external' landscape
which is altering? How often recently most of us have had the feeling of déjà
vu, of having seen all this before, in fact of remembering these swamps and
lagoons all too well. However selective the conscious mind may be, most
biological memories are unpleasant ones, echoes of danger and terror.
Nothing endures for so long as fear. Everywhere in nature one sees evidence
of innate releasing mechanisms literally millions of years old, which have lain
dormant through thousands of generations but retained their power
undiminished. The field-rat's inherited image of the hawk's silhouette is the
46
classic example-even a paper silhouette drawn across a cage sends it rushing
frantically for cover. And how else can you explain the universal but
completely groundless loathing of the spider, only one species of which has
ever been known to sting? Or the equally surprising-in view of their
comparative rarity-hatred of snakes and reptiles? Simply because we all carry
within us a submerged memory of the time when the giant spiders were lethal,
and when the reptiles were the planet's dominant life form."
Feeling the brass compass which weighed down his pocket, Kerans said:
"So you're frightened that the increased temperature and radiation are alerting
similar IRM's in our own minds?"
"Not in our minds, Robert. These are the oldest memories on Earth, the
time-codes carried in every chromosome and gene. Every step we've taken in
our evolution is a milestone inscribed with organic memories-from the
enzymes controlling the carbon dioxide cycle to the organisation of the
brachial plexus and the nerve pathways of the Pyramid cells in the mid-brain,
each is a record of a thousand decisions taken in the face of a sudden physicochemical
crisis. Just as psychoanalysis reconstructs the original traumatic
situation in order to release the repressed material, so we are now being
plunged back into the archaeopsychic past, uncovering the ancient taboos and
drives that have been dormant for epochs. The brief span of an individual life
is misleading. Each one of us is as old as the entire biological kingdom, and
our bloodstreams are tributaries of the great sea of its total memory. The
uterine odyssey of the growing fetus recapitulates the entire evolutionary past,
and its central nervous system is coded time scale, each nexus of neurons and
each spinal level marking a symbolic station, a unit of neuronic time.
"The further down the CNS you move, from the hind-brain through the
medulla into the spinal cord, the further you descend back into the neuronic
past. For example, the junction between the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae,
between T-12 and L-1, is the great zone of transit between the gill-breathing
47
fish and the airbreathing amphibians with their respiratory rib-cages, the very
junction where we stand now on the shores of this lagoon, between the
Paleozoic and Triassic Eras."
Bodkin moved back to his desk, and ran his hand over the rack of records.
Listening distantly to Bodkin's quiet, unhurried voice, Kerans toyed with the
notion that the row of parallel black discs was a model of a neurophonic
spinal column. He remembered the faint drumming emitted by the record
player in Hardman's cabin, and its strange undertones. Perhaps the conceit
was closer to the truth than he imagined?
Bodkin went on: "If you like, you could call this the Psychology of Total
Equivalents-let's say 'Neuronics' for short-and dismiss it as metabiological
fantasy. However, I am convinced that as we move back through geophysical
time so we re-enter the amnionic corridor and move back through spinal and
archaeopsychic time, recollecting in our unconscious minds the landscapes of
each epoch, each with a distinct geological terrain, its own unique flora and
fauna, as recognisable to anyone else as they would be to a traveler in a
Wellsian time machine. Except that this is no scenic railway, but a total reorientation
of the personality. If we let these buried phantoms master us as
they re-appear we'll be swept back helplessly in the flood-tide like pieces of
flotsam." He picked one of the records from the rack, then pushed it away
with a gesture of uncertainty. 'This afternoon I may have been taking a risk
with Hardman, using the heater to simulate the sun and raise the temperature
well into the 120's, but it was worth a chance. For the previous three weeks
his dreams were almost driving him out of his mind, but during the last few
days he's been much less disturbed, almost as if he were accepting the dreams
and allowing himself to be carried back without retaining any conscious
control. For his own sake I want to keep him awake as long as possible-the
alarm clocks may do it."
"If he remembers to keep them set," Kerans commented quietly.
48
Outside in the lagoon the sounds of Riggs' cutter droned past. Stretching
his legs, Kerans walked over to the window, and watched the landing craft
swing in a diminishing arc around the base. While it berthed by the jetty Riggs
held an informal conference with Macready across the gangway. Several times
he pointed to the testing station with his baton, and Kerans assumed that they
were preparing to tow the station over to the base. But for some reason the
imminent departure left him unmoved. Bodkin's speculations, however
nebulous, and his new psychology of Neuronics, offered a more valid
explanation for the metamorphosis taking place in his mind than any other.
The tacit assumption made by the UN directorate-that within the new
perimeters described by the Arctic and Antarctic Circles life would continue
much as before, with the same social and domestic relationships, by and large
the same ambitions and satisfactions-was obviously fallacious, as the
mounting flood-water and temperature would show when they reached the
so-called polar redoubts. A more important task than map ping the harbours
and lagoons of the external landscape was to chart the ghostly deltas and
luminous beaches of the submerged neuronic continents.
"Alan," he asked over his shoulder, still watching Riggs stamping about on
the landing jetty, "why don't you draft a report to Byrd, I think you should let
them know. There's always a chance of-"
But Bodkin had gone. Kerans listened to his feet dump slowly up the
stairway and disappear into his cabin, the fatigued tread of a man too old and
too experienced to care whether or not his warnings were heeded.
Kerans went back to his desk and sat down. From his jacket pocket he
withdrew the compass and placed it in front of him, cradling it between his
hands. Around him the muted sounds of the laboratory formed a low
background to his mind, the furry puttering of the marmoset, the tick of a
recording spool somewhere, the grating of a revolving rig estimating a
creeper's phototropism.
49
Idly Kerans examined the compass, swinging the bearing gently in its airbath
and then aligning the pointer and scale. He tried to decide why he had
taken it from the armoury. Normally it was installed in one of the motor
launches, and its disappearance would soon be reported, probably involve
him in the petty humiliation of admitting its theft.
Caging the compass, he swung it around towards himself, without realising
it sank into a momentary reverie in which his entire consciousness became
focused on the serpentine terminal touched by the pointer, on the confused,
uncertain but curiously potent image summed up by the concept 'South', with
all its dormant magic and mesmeric power, diffusing outwards from the brass
bowl held in his hands like the heady vapours of some spectral grail.
50
4 - The Causeways of the Sun
The next day, for reasons Kerans was to understand fully only much later,
Lieutenant Hardman disappeared.
After a night of deep, dreamless sleep Kerans rose early and had
breakfasted by seven o'clock. He then spent an hour on the balcony, sitting
back in one of the beach chairs in a pair of white latex shorts, the sunlight
expanding across the dark water bathing his lean ebony body. Overhead the
sky was vivid and marbled, the black bowl of the lagoon, by contrast,
infinitely deep and motionless, like an immense well of amber. The treecovered
buildings emerging from its rim seemed millions of years old, thrown
up out of the Earth's magma by some vast natural cataclysm, embalmed in the
gigantic intervals of time that had elapsed during their subsidence.
Pausing by the desk to run his fingers over the brass compass gleaming in
the darkness of the suite, Kerans went into the bedroom and changed into his
khaki drill uniform, a minimal concession to Riggs' preparations for departure.
The Italian sportswear was now hardly de rigeur, and it would only rouse the
Colonel's suspicions if he were seen sauntering about in a pastel-coloured
ensemble with a Ritz hallmark
Although he accepted the possibility that he would remain behind, Kerans
found himself reluctant to take any systematic precautions. Apart from his
fuel and food supplies, for which he had been dependent during the previous
six months on Colonel Riggs' largesse, he had also needed an endless
succession of minor spares and replacements, from a new watchface to a
complete rewiring of the lighting system in the suite. Once the base and its
workshop had left he would soon find himself saddled with an accumulating
series of petty annoyances, and with no accommodating technical sergeant to
remove them.
51
For the convenience of the stores staff, and to save himself unnecessary
journeys to and from the base, Kerans had stockpiled a month's forward
supplies of canned food in the suite. Most of this consisted of condensed milk
and luncheon meat, virtually inedible unless supplemented by the delicacies
stored away in Beatrice's deep freeze. It was this capacious locker, with its
reserves of pate du fois grois and filet mignon, which Kerans counted upon to
keep them going, but at the most there was a bare three months' stock. After
that they would have to live off the land, switch their menu to wood soup and
steak iguana.
Fuel raised more serious problems. The reserve tanks of diesel oil at the
Ritz held little more than 500 gallons, sufficient to operate the cooling system
for at most a couple of months. By closing down the bedroom and dressing
room and moving into the lounge, and by raising the ambient temperature to
ninety degrees, he would with luck double its life, but once the supplies were
exhausted the chances of supplementing them were negligible. Every reserve
tank and cache in the gutted buildings around the lagoons had long since been
siphoned dry by the waves of refugees moving northward during the past
thirty years in their power boats and cabin cruisers. The tank on the
catamaran outboard motor carried three gallons, enough for thirty miles, or a
return trip a day for a month between the Ritz and Beatrice's lagoon.
For some reason, however, this inverted Crusoeism-the deliberate
marooning of himself without the assistance of a gear-laden carrack wrecked
on a convenient reef-raised few anxieties in Kerans' mind. As he let himself
out of the suite he left the thermostat at its usual eighty degree setting, despite
the fuel the generator would waste, reluctant to make even a nominal
concession to the hazards facing him after Riggs' departure. At first he
assumed that this reflected a shrewd unconscious assessment that his good
sense would prevail, but as he started the outboard and drove the catamaran
through the cool oily swells towards the creek into the next lagoon he realised
that this indifference marked the special nature of the decision to remain
52
behind. To use the symbolic language of Bodkin's schema, he would then be
abandoning the conventional estimates of time in relation to his own physical
needs and entering the world of total, neuronic time, where the massive
intervals of the geological time-scale calibrated his existence. Here a million
years was the shortest working unit, and problems of food and clothing
became as irrelevant as they would have been to a Buddhist contemplative
lotus-squatting before an empty rice-bowl under the protective canopy of the
million-headed cobra of eternity.
Entering the third lagoon, an oar raised to fend off the ten-foot-long blades
of a giant horse-tail dipping its leaves into the mouth of the creek, he noticed
without emotion that a party of men under Sergeant Macready had hoisted
the anchors of the testing station and were towing it slowly towards the base.
As the gap between the two closed, like curtains drawing together after the
end of a play, Kerans stood in the stern of the catamaran under the dripping
umbrella of leaves, a watcher in the wings whose contribution to the drama,
however small, had now completely ended.
In order not to attract attention by restarting the engine, he pushed out into
the sunlight, the giant leaves sinking to their hilts in the green jelly of the
water, and paddled slowly around the perimeter of the lagoon to Beatrice's
apartment block. Intermittently the roar of the helicopter dinned across the
water as it carried out its tarmac check, and the swells from the testing station
drummed against the prows of the catamaran and drove on through the open
windows on his right, slapping around the internal walls. Beatrice's power
cruiser creaked painfully at its moorings. The engine room had flooded and
the stern was awash under the weight of the two big Chrysler engines. Sooner
or later one of the thermal storms would catch the craft and anchor it forever
fifty feet down in one of the submerged streets.
When he stepped out of the elevator the patio around the swimming pool
was deserted, the previous evening's glasses still on the tray between the
53
reclining chairs. Already the sunlight was beginning to fill the pool,
illuminating the yellow sea-horses and blue tridents that patterned its floor. A
few bats hung in the shadows below the gutter over Beatrice's bedroom
window, but they flew off as Kerans sat down, like vampiric spirits fleeing the
rising day.
Through the blinds Kerans caught a glimpse of Beatrice moving about
quietly, and five minutes later she walked into the lounge, a black towel in a
single twist around her midriff. She was partly hidden in the dim light at the
far end of the room, and seemed tired and withdrawn, greeting him with a
half-hearted wave. Leaning one elbow against the bar, she made a drink for
herself, stared blankly at one of the Delvaux and returned to her bedroom.
When she failed to reappear Kerans went in search of her. As he pushed
back the glass doors the hot air trapped inside the lounge hit his face like
fumes vented from a crowded galley. Several times within the past month the
generator had failed to respond immediately to the thermostat, and the
temperature was well into the nineties, probably responsible for Beatrice's
lethargy and ennui.
She was sitting on the bed when Kerans entered, the tumbler of whiskey
resting on her smooth knees. The thick hot air in the room reminded Kerans
of Hardman's cabin during the experiment Bodkin had conducted on the
pilot. He went to the thermostat on the bedside table and jerked the tab down
from seventy to sixty degrees.
"It's broken down again," Beatrice told him matter-of-factly. "The engine
kept stopping."
Kerans tried to take the glass from her hands but she steered it away from
him. "Leave me alone, Robert," she said in a tired voice. "I know I'm a loose,
drunken woman but I spent last night in the Martian jungles and I don't want
to be lectured."
54
Kerans scrutinised her closely, smiling to himself in a mixture of affection
and despair. "I'll see if I can repair the motor. This bedroom smells as if
you've had an entire penal battalion billeted with you. Take a shower, Bea, and
try to pull yourself together. Riggs is leaving tomorrow, we'll need our wits
about us. What are these nightmares you're having?"
Beatrice shrugged. "Jungle dreams, Robert," she murmured ambiguously.
"I'm learning my ABC's again. Last night was the delta jungles." She gave him
a bleak smile, then added with a touch of malicious humour: "Don't look so
stern, you'll be dreaming them too, soon."
"I hope not." Kerans watched distastefully as she raised the glass to her
lips. "And pour that drink away. Scotch breakfasts may be an old Highland
custom but they're murder on the liver."
Beatrice waved him away. "I know. Alcohol kills slowly, but I'm in no
hurry. Go away, Robert."
Kerans gave up and turned on his heel. He took the stairway from the
kitchen into the store-room below, found a torch and the tool-set, and began
to work on the generator.
Half an hour later, when he emerged onto the patio, Beatrice had
apparently recovered completely from her torpor and was intently painting
her nails with a bottle of blue varnish.
"Hello, Robert, are you in a better mood now?"
Kerans sat down on the tiled floor, wiping the last traces of grease off his
hands. Crisply he punched the firm swell of her calf, then fended away the
revenging heel at his head. "I've cured the generator, with luck you won't have
any more trouble. It's rather amusing, the timing device on the two-stroke
55
starting engine had gone wrong, it was actually running backwards."
He was about to explain the irony of the joke at full length when a loudhailer
blared from the lagoon below. The sounds of sudden excited activity
had sprung up from the base; engines whined and accelerated, davits shrilled
as the two reserve motor launches were lowered into the water, there was a
medley of voices shouting and feet racing down gangways.
Kerans rose and hurried around the pool to the rail. "Don't tell me they're
leaving today-? Riggs is clever enough to try that in the hope of catching us
unprepared."
Beatrice at his side, the towel clasped to her breasts, they looked down at
the base. Every member of the unit appeared to have been mobilised, and the
cutter and the two launches surged and jockeyed around the landing jetty. The
drooping rotors of the helicopter were circling slowly, Riggs and Macready
about to embark. The other men were lined up on the jetty, waiting their turn
to climb into the three craft. Even Bodkin had been roused from his bunk,
and was standing bare-chested on the bridge of the testing station, shouting
up at Riggs.
Suddenly Macready noticed Kerans at the balcony rail. He spoke to the
Colonel, who picked up an electric megaphone and walked forwards across
the roof.
"KER-ANS!! DOC-TOR KER-ANS!!"
Giant fragments of the amplified phrases boomed among the rooftops,
echoing off the aluminium in-falls set into the sheets of windows. Kerans
cupped his ears, trying to distinguish what the Colonel was shouting, but the
sounds were lost in the mounting roar of the helicopter. Then Riggs and
Macready climbed into the cabin, and the pilot began to semaphore at Kerans
through the cockpit windscreen.
56
Kerans translated the morse signals, then turned quickly from the rail and
began to carry the deck chairs into the lounge.
"They're going to pick me up here," he told Beatrice as the helicopter rose
from its pedestal and lifted diagonally across the lagoon. "You'd better get
dressed or out of sight. The slip-stream will strip your towel away like tissue
paper. Riggs has got enough to contend with now."
Beatrice helped him furl the awning, and stepped into the lounge as the
flickering shadow of the helicopter filled the patio, the downdraught fanning
across their shoulders.
"But what's happened, Robert? Why is Riggs so excited?"
Kerans shielded his head from the engine roar and stared out across the
green-ringed lagoons stretching towards the horizon, a sudden spasm of
anxiety twisting one corner of his mouth.
"He's not excited, just worried stiff. Everything is beginning to collapse
around him. Lieutenant Hardman has disappeared!"
Like an immense putrescent sore, the jungle lay exposed below the open
hatchway of the helicopter. Giant groves of gymnosperms stretched in dense
clumps along the rooftops of the submerged buildings, smothering the white
rectangular outlines. Here and there an old concrete water tower protruded
from the morass, or the remains of a makeshift jetty still floated beside the
hulk of a collapsing office block, overgrown with feathery acacias and
flowering tamarisks. Narrow creeks, the canopies overhead turning them into
green-lit tunnels, wound away from the larger lagoons, eventually joining the
six hundred-yard-wide channels which broadened outwards across the former
suburbs of the city. Everywhere the silt encroached, shoring itself in huge
banks against a railway viaduct or crescent of offices, oozing through a
submerged arcade like the fetid contents of some latter-day Cloaca Maxima.
57
Many of the smaller lakes were now filled by the silt, yellow discs of fungus
covered sludge from which a profuse tangle of competing plant forms
emerged, walled gardens in an insane Eden.
Clamped securely to the cabin handrail by the nylon harness around his
waist and shoulders, Kerans gazed down at the unfolding landscape, following
the water-ways unwinding from the three central lagoons. Five hundred feet
below the shadow of the helicopter raced across the mottled green surface of
the water, and he focused his attention on the area immediately around it. An
immense profusion of animal life filled the creeks and canals: water-snakes
coiled themselves among the crushed palisades of the water-logged bamboo
groves, colonies of bats erupted out of the green tunnels like clouds of
exploding soot, iguanas sat motionlessly on the shaded cornices like stone
sphinxes. Often, as if disturbed by the noise of the helicopter, a human form
seemed to dart and hide among the water-line windows, then revealed itself to
be a crocodile snapping at a water-fowl, or one end of a subsiding log
dislodged from the buffeted tree-ferns.
Twenty miles away the horizon was still obscured by the early morning
mists, huge palls of golden vapour that hung from the sky like diaphanous
curtains, but the air over the city was clear and vivid, the exhaust vapour of
the helicopter sparkling as it receded in a long undulating signature. As they
moved away from the central lagoons in their outward spiral sweep Kerans
leaned against the hatchway and watched the glistening display, abandoning
his search of the jungle below.
The chances of seeing Hardman from the air were infinitesimal. Unless he
had taken refuge in a building near the base he would have been forced to
travel along the water-ways, where he had the maximum possible protection
from aerial observation under the overhanging fern trees.
In the starboard hatchway Riggs and Macready continued their vigil,
58
passing a pair of binoculars to and fro. Without his peaked cap, his thin sandy
hair blown forwards over his face, Riggs looked like a ferocious sparrow, his
little jaw jutting fiercely at the open air.
He noticed Kerans gazing up at the sky and shouted: "Seen him yet,
Doctor? Don't dawdle now, the secret of a successful sweep is one hundred
percent cover, one hundred percent concentration."
Accepting the rebuke, Kerans scanned the tilting disc of the jungle again,
the tall towers of the central lagoon pivoting around the hatchway. Hardman's
disappearance had been discovered by a sick-bay orderly at 8 o'clock that
morning, but his bed was cold and he had almost certainly left the previous
evening, probably soon after the final ward-roll at 9-30. None of the smaller
scows hitched to the jetty rail had gone, but Hardman could easily have lashed
together a couple of the empty fuel drums stored in a pile by the C-Deck hold
and lowered them noiselessly into the water. However crude, such a craft
would paddle smoothly and carry him ten miles away by day-break,
somewhere on the perimeter of a search area of some seventy-five square
miles, every acre of which was honeycombed by derelict buildings.
Unable to see Bodkin before being winched aboard the helicopter, Kerans
could only speculate about Hardman's motives for leaving the base, and
whether these were part of a grander design maturing slowly in the
Lieutenant's mind or merely a sudden meaningless reaction to the news that
they were leaving the lagoons for the north. Kerans' initial excitement had
evaporated, and he felt a curious sense of relief, as if one of the opposing
lines of force that encircled him had been removed by Hardman's
disappearance and the tension and impotence contained in the system
suddenly released. If anything, however, the task of remaining behind would
now be even more difficult.
Unshackling his harness, Riggs stood up with a gesture of exasperation and
59
handed the binoculars to one of the two soldiers squatting on the floor at the
rear of the cabin.
"Open searches are a waste of time over this type of terrain," he shouted at
Kerans. 'We'll go down somewhere and have a careful look at the map, you
can have a shot at reading Hardman's psychology."
They were about ten miles north-west of the central lagoons, the towers
almost obscured in the mists along the horizon. Five miles away, directly
between them and the base, was one of the two motor launches, cruising
down an open channel, its white wake fading across the glass sheet of the
water. Blocked by the urban concentration to the south, less silt had
penetrated into the area, and the vegetation was lighter, more expanses of
unbroken water between the principal lines of buildings. Altogether the zone
below them was empty and uncongested, and Kerans felt convinced, though
for no rational reason, that Hardman would not be found in the north-west
sector.
Riggs climbed up into the cockpit and a moment later the speed and
inclination of the helicopter altered. They began to make a shallow dive,
swinging down to within a hundred feet of the water, glided in and out of the
wide canals looking for a convenient rooftop on which to perch. Finally they
picked out the humped back of a half-submerged cinema and let down slowly
onto the square firm roof of the neo-assyrian portico.
For a few minutes they steadied their legs, gazing out over the expanses of
blue water. The nearest structure was an isolated department store two
hundred yards away, and the open vistas reminded Kerans of Herodotus'
description of the landscape in Egypt at floodtime, with its rampart cities like
the islands of the Aegean Sea.
Riggs opened his map wallet and spread the polythene print across the
cabin floor. Resting his elbows on the edge of the hatchway, he put his finger
60
on their present landing stage.
"Well, Sergeant," he told Daley, "we seem to be half-way back to Byrd.
Apart from wearing out the engine we haven't achieved much."
Daley nodded, his small serious face hidden inside the fiber-glass helmet.
"Sir, I think our only chance is to carry out low-level inspections over a few
selected runs. There's just a hope we might see something-a raft or an oil
patch."
"Agreed. But the problem is-" here Riggs drummed on the map with his
baton "-where? Hardman is very probably no more than two or three miles
from the base. What's your guess, Doctor?"
Kerans shrugged. "I don't really know what Hardman's motives are,
Colonel. Latterly he'd been in Bodkin's charge. It may be…"
His voice began to trail off, and Daley cut in with another suggestion,
distracting Riggs' attention. For the next five minutes the Colonel, Daley and
Macready argued about possible routes Hardman had taken, marking only the
wider water-ways as if Hardman were navigating a pocket battleship. Kerans
looked around at the water eddying slowly past the cinema. A few branches
and dumps of weed drifted along on the northward current, the bright
sunlight masking the molten mirror of the surface. The water drummed
against the portico beneath his feet, beating slowly against his mind, and
setting up a widening circle of interference patterns as if crossing it at an
opposite direction to its own course of flow. He watched a succession of
wavelets lapping at the sloping roof, wishing that he could leave the Colonel
and walk straight down into the water, dissolve himself and the ever-present
phantoms which attended him like sentinel birds in the cool bower of its
magical calm, in the luminous, dragon-green, serpent-haunted sea.
Suddenly he realised without any shadow of doubt where Hardman was to
61
be found.
He waited for Daley to finish. "… I knew Lieutenant Hardman, sir, flew
nearly five thousand hours with him, he's obviously had a brain-storm. He
wanted to get back to Byrd, must have decided he couldn't wait any longer,
not even two days. He'll have headed north, be resting somewhere along these
open channels out of the city."
Riggs nodded doubtfully, apparently unconvinced but prepared to accept
the Sergeant's advice in default of any other.
"Well, you may be right. I suppose it's worth trying. What do you think,
Kerans?"
Kerans shook his head. "Colonel, it's a complete waste of time searching
the areas north of the city. Hardman wouldn't have come up here, it's too
open and isolated. I don't know whether he's on foot or paddling a raft, but
he certainly isn't going north-Byrd is the last place on Earth he wants to
return to. There's only one direction in which Hardman is heading-south."
Kerans pointed to the nexus of channels which flowed into the central
lagoons, tributaries of a single huge water-way three miles south of the city, its
passage indented and diverted by the giant silt banks. "Hardman will be
somewhere along there. It probably took him all night to reach the main
channel, and I should guess that he's resting in one of the small inlets before
he moves on tonight."
He broke off and Riggs stared hard at the map, peaked cap pulled down
over his eyes in a gesture of concentration.
"But why south?" Daley protested. "Once he leaves the channel there's
nothing but solid jungle and open sea. The temperature is going up all the
time-he'll fry."
62
Riggs looked up at Kerans. "Sergeant Daley has a point, Doctor. Why
should Hardman choose to travel south?"
Looking out across the water again, Kerans replied in a flat voice: "Colonel,
there isn't any other direction."
Riggs hesitated, then glanced at Macready, who had stepped back from the
group and was standing beside Kerans, his tall stooped figure silhouetted like
a gaunt crow against the water. Almost imperceptibly he nodded to Riggs,
answering the unspoken question. Even Daley put a foot up on the cockpit
entry step, accepting the logic of Kerans' argument and the shared
understanding of Hardman's motives once Kerans had made them explicit.
Three minutes later the helicopter was speeding off at full manifold
pressure towards the lagoons in the south.
As Kerans had prophesied, they found Hardman among the silt flats.
Descending to three hundred feet above the water, they began to rake up
and down the distal five-mile length of the main channel. The huge banks of
silt lifted above the surface like the backs of yellow sperm whales. Wherever
the hydrodynamic contours of the channel gave the silt banks any degree of
permanence, the surrounding jungle spilled from the rooftops and rooted
itself in the damp loam, matting the whole morass into an immovable
structure. From the hatchway Kerans scrutinised the narrow beaches under
the outer edge of the fern trees, watching for the tell-tale signs of a
camouflaged raft or make-shift hut.
After twenty minutes, however, and a dozen careful sweeps of the channel,
Riggs turned from the hatchway with a rueful shake of his head.
"You're probably right, Robert, but it's a hopeless job. Hardman's no fool,
if he wants to hide from us we'll never find him. Even if he were leaning out
63
of a window and waving, ten to one we wouldn't see him."
Kerans murmured in reply, watching the surface below. Each of the
tracking runs was about a hundred yards to the starboard of the previous one,
and for the last three runs he had been watching the semi-circular crescent of
what appeared to be a large apartment block standing in the angle between
the channel and the southern bank of a small creek which ran off into the
surrounding jungle. The upper eight or nine storeys of the block stood above
the water, enclosing a low mound of muddy-brown silt. The surface streamed
with water draining away from a collection of shallow pools covering it. Two
hours earlier the bank had been a sheet of wet mud, but by ten o'clock, as the
helicopter flew over, the mud was beginning to dry and grow firm. To
Kerans, shielding his eyes from the reflected sunlight, its smooth surface
appeared to be scored by two faint parallel lines, about six feet apart, that led
across to the jutting roof of an almost submerged balcony. As they swept
overhead he tried to see under the concrete slab, but its mouth was choked
with refuse and rotting logs.
He touched Riggs' arm and pointed to the tracks, so immersed in tracing
their winding progress to the balcony that he almost failed to notice the
equally distinct pattern of imprints emerging in the drying surface between the
lines, spaced some four feet apart, unmistakably the footsteps of a tall
powerful man hauling a heavy load.
As the noise of the helicopter's engine faded out on the roof above them,
Riggs and Macready bent down and inspected the crude catamaran hidden
behind a screen of bocage under the balcony. Fashioned from two drop tanks
lashed to either end of a metal bed-frame, its twin grey hulls were still
streaked with silt. Clumps of mud from Hardman's feet crossed the room
opening onto the balcony and disappeared through the suite into the adjacent
corridor.
64
"This is it without a doubt-agree, Sergeant?" Riggs asked, stepping out into
the sunlight to look up at the crescent of apartment blocks. A chain of
autonomous units, they were linked by short causeways between the elevator
wells at the end of each building. Most of the windows were broken, the
cream facing tiles covered by huge patches of fungus, and the whole complex
looked like an over-ripe camembert cheese.
Macready knelt down by one of the hulls, cleaning away the silt, then traced
out the code number painted across the bow. "UNAF 22-H-549-that's us, sir.
The drop tanks were being cleared out yesterday, we'd stored them on CDeck.
He must have taken a spare bed from the sick-bay afterward-roll."
"Good." Rubbing his hands together with pleasure, Riggs stepped over to
Kerans, smiling jauntily, his self-confidence and good humour fully restored.
"Excellent, Robert. Superb diagnostic skill, you were quite right, of course."
He peered shrewdly at Kerans, as if speculating on the real sources of this
remarkable insight, invisibly marking him off. "Cheer up, Hardman will be
grateful to you when we take him back."
Kerans stood on the edge of the balcony, the slope of caking silt below
him. He looked up at the silent curve of windows, wondering which of the
thousand or so rooms would be Hardman's hiding place. "I hope you're right.
You've still got to catch him."
"Don't worry, we will." Riggs began to shout up at the two men on the
roof, helping Daley lash down the helicopter. 'Wilson, keep a look-out from
the south-west end; Caldwell, you work your way across to the north. Keep an
eye on both sides, he might try to swim for it."
The two men saluted and moved off, their carbines held at their hips.
Macready cradled a Thompson gun in the crook of his arm, and as Riggs
unbuttoned the flap of his holster Kerans said quietly: "Colonel, we're not
tracking down a wild dog."
65
Riggs waved this aside. "Relax, Robert, it's just that I don't want my leg
bitten off by some sleeping croc. Though as a matter of interest-" here he
flashed Kerans a gleaming smile "-Hardman has got a.45 Colt with him."
Leaving Kerans to digest this, he picked up the electric megaphone.
"HARDMAN!! THIS IS COLONEL RIGGS!!" He bellowed Hardman's
name at the silent heat, then winked at Kerans and added: "DR. KERANS
WANTS TO TALK TO YOU, LIEUTENANT!!"
Focused by the crescent of buildings, the sounds echoed away across the
swamps and creeks, booming distantly over the great empty mudflats. Around
them everything glistened in the immense heat, and the men on the roof
fretted nervously under their forage caps. A thick cloacal stench exuded from
the silt flat, a corona of a million insects pulsing and humming hungrily above
it, and a sudden spasm of nausea knotted Kerans' gullet, for a moment
dizzying him. Pressing a wrist tightly to his forehead, he leaned back against a
pillar, listening to the echoes reverberate around him. Four hundred yards
away two white-faced clock towers protruded through the vegetation, like the
temple spires of some lost jungle religion, and the sounds of his name-
"Kerans… Kerans… Kerans"- reflected off them seemed to Kerans to toll
with an intense premonition of terror and disaster, the meaningless
orientation of the clock hands identifying him, more completely than anything
he had previously experienced, with all the confused and minatory spectres
that cast their shadows more and more darkly through his mind, the myriadhanded
mandala of cosmic time.
His name still echoed faintly in his ears as they began their search of the
building. He took up his position at the stairwell at the centre of each corridor
while Figgs and Macready inspected the apartments, keeping a look-out as
they climbed the floors. The building had been gutted. All the floorboards
had rotted or been ripped out, and they moved slowly along the tiled inlays,
66
stepping warily from one concrete tie-beam to another. Most of the plaster
had slipped from the walls and lay in grey heaps along the skirting boards.
Wherever sunlight filtered through, the bare lathes were intertwined with
creeper and wire-moss, and the original fabric of the building seemed solely
supported by the profusion of vegetation ramifying through every room and
corridor.
Through the cracks in the floors rose the stench of the greasy water
swirling through the windows below. Disturbed for the first time in many
years, the bats which hung from the tilting picture rails flew frantically for the
windows, dispersing with cries of pain in the brilliant sunlight. Lizards
scuttered and darted through the floor cracks, or skated desperately around
the dry baths in the bathrooms.
Exacerbated by the heat, Riggs' impatience mounted as they climbed the
floors and had covered all but the top two without Success.
"Well, where is he?" Riggs rested against the stair-rail, gesturing for quiet,
and listened to the silent building, breathing tightly through his teeth. 'We'll
stand easy for five minutes, Sergeant. Now's the time for caution. He's
somewhere around here."
Macready slung his Thompson over his shoulder and climbed to the fan
light on the next landing which let in a thin breeze. Kerans leaned against the
wall, the sweat pouring across his back and chest, temples thudding from the
exertion of mounting the stairs. It was 11-30, and the temperature outside was
well over 120 degrees. He looked down at Riggs' flushed pink face, admiring
the Colonel's self-discipline and single-mindedness.
"Don't look so condescending, Robert. I know I'm sweating like a pig, but
I haven't had as much rest as you lately."
The two men exchanged glances, each aware of the conflict of attitude
67
towards Hardman, and Kerans, in an effort to resolve the rivalry between
them, said quietly: "You'll probably catch him now, ColoneL"
Searching for somewhere to sit, be walked off down the corridor and
pushed back the door into the first apartment.
As he unlatched the door the frame collapsed weakly into a litter of wormeaten
dust and timbers, and he stepped across it to the wide french windows
over-looking the balcony. A little air funneled through, and Kerans let it play
over his face and chest, surveying the jungle below. The promontory on
which the crescent of apartment houses stood had at one time been a small
hill, and a number of the buildings visible beneath the vegetation on the other
side of the silt flat were still above the flood-waters. Kerans stared at the two
clock towers jutting up like white obelisks above the fern fronds. The yellow
air of the noon high seemed to press down like a giant translucent
counterpane on the leafy spread, a thousand motes of light spitting like
diamonds whenever a bough moved and deflected the sun's rays. The
obscured outline of a classical portico and colonnaded facade below the
towers suggested that the buildings were once part of some small municipal
centre. One of the clock-faces was without its hands; the other, by
coincidence, had stopped at almost exactly the right time-11-35. Kerans
wondered whether the clock was in fact working, tended by some mad recluse
clinging to a last meaningless register of sanity, though if the mechanism were
still operable Riggs might well perform that role. Several times, before they
abandoned one of the drowned cities, he had wound the two-ton mechanism
of some rusty cathedral clock and they had sailed off to a last carillon of
chimes across the water. For nights afterwards, in his dreams, Kerans had
seen Riggs dressed as William Tell, striding about in a huge Dalinian
landscape, planting immense dripping sundials like daggers in the fused sand.
Kerans leaned against the window, waiting as the minutes passed and left
behind the clock fixed at 11-35, overtaking it like a vehicle in a faster lane. Or
68
was it not stationary (guaranteed though it would be to tell the time with
complete, unquestionable accuracy twice a day-more than most time-pieces)
but merely so slow that its motion appeared to be imperceptible? The slower
a clock, the nearer it approximated to the infinitely gradual and majestic
progression of cosmic time-in fact, by reversing a clock's direction and
running it backwards one could devise a time-piece that in a sense was
moving even more slowly than the universe, and consequently part of an even
greater spatio-temporal system.
Kerans' amusement at this conceit was distracted by his discovery among
the clutter of debris on the opposite bank of a small cemetery sloping down
into the water, its leaning headstones advancing to their crowns like a party of
bathers. He remembered again one ghastly cemetery over which they had
moored, its ornate florentine tombs cracked and sprung, corpses floating out
in their unraveling winding-sheets in a grim rehearsal of the Day of
Judgement.
Averting his eyes, he turned away from the window, with a jolt realised that
a tall black-bearded man was standing motionlessly in a doorway behind him.
Startled, Kerans stared uncertainly at the figure, with an effort reassembling
his thoughts. The big man stood in a slightly stooped but relaxed pose, his
heavy arms loosely at his sides. Black mud caked across his wrists and
forehead, and clogged his boots and the fabric of his drill trousers, for a
moment reminding Kerans of one of the resurrected corpses. His bearded
chin was sunk between his broad shoulders, the impression of constraint and
fatigue heightened by the medical orderly's blue denim jacket several sizes too
small which he wore, the corporal's stripe pulled up over the swell of his
deltoid muscle. The expression on his face was one of hungry intensity, but he
gazed at Kerans with somber detachment, his eyes like heavily banked fires, a
thin glow of interest in the biologist the only outward show of the energy
within.
69
Kerans waited until his eyes adjusted themselves to the darkness at the rear
of the room, looking involuntarily at the bedroom doorway through which
the bearded man had stepped. He reached out one hand to him, half-afraid of
breaking the spell between them, warning him not to move, and elicited in
return an expression of curiously understanding sympathy, almost as if their
roles were reversed.
"Hardman!" Kerans whispered.
With a galvanic leap, Hardman flung himself at Kerans, his big frame
blocking off half the room, feinted just before they collided and swerved past,
before Kerans could regain his balance had jumped out onto the balcony and
climbed over the rail.
"Hardman!" As one of the men on the roof shouted the alarm Kerans
reached the balcony. Hardman swung himself like an acrobat down the drainpipe
to the parapet below. Riggs and Macready dived into the room. Holding
on to his hat, Riggs pivoted out over the rail, swore as Hardman disappeared
into the apartment.
"Good man, Kerans, you nearly held him!" Together they ran back into the
corridor and raced down the stairway, saw Hardman swinging around the
banisters four floors below, hurling himself from one landing to the next in a
single stride.
When they reached the lowest floor they were thirty seconds behind
Hardman, and a medley of excited shouts were coming from the roof. But
Riggs paused stock-still on the balcony.
"Good God, he's trying to drag his raft back into the water!"
Thirty yards away, Hardman was dragging the catamaran across the caking
mass of silt, the tow-rope over his shoulders, jerking its bows into the air with
70
demoniac energy.
Riggs buttoned the flap of his bolster, sadly shaking his head. There was a
full fifty yards to the water's edge, and Hardman was sinking up to his knees
in the damper silt, oblivious of the men on the roof looking down at him.
Finally he tossed away the tow-rope and seized the bed-frame in both hands,
began to wrench it along in slow painful jerks, the denim jacket split down his
back.
Riggs stepped up onto the balcony, gesturing to Wilson and Caldwell to
come down. "Poor devil, he looks all in. Doctor, you stay close, you may be
able to pacify him."
Carefully they dosed in on Hardman. The five men, Riggs, Macready, the
two soldiers and Kerans, advanced down the sloping crust, shielding their
eyes from the intense sunlight. Like a wounded water-buffalo, Hardman
continued to wrestle in the mud ten yards in front of them. Kerans motioned
to the others to stay still and then walked forwards with Wilson, a blondhaired
youth who had once been Hardman's orderly. Wondering what to say
to Hardman, he cleared the knots of phlegm from his throat.
On the roof behind them there was a sudden staccato roar of exhaust,
splitting the silence of the tableau. A few steps behind Wilson, Kerans
hesitated, saw Riggs look up in annoyance at the helicopter. Assuming that
their mission was now over, Daley had started his engine, and the blades were
swinging slowly through the air.
Roused from his attempt to reach the water, Hardman looked around at
the group encircling him, released the catamaran and crouched down behind
it. Wilson began to wade forward precariously through the soft silt along the
water's edge, the carbine held across his chest. As he sank up to his waist he
shouted at Kerans, his voice lost in the mounting roar of the engine, exhaust
spitting in sharp cracks over their heads. Suddenly Wilson swayed, and before
71
Kerans could steady him Hardman leaned across the catamaran, the big
Colt.45 in his hand, and fired at them. The flame from the barrel stabbed
through the dazzling air, and with a short cry Wilson fell across the carbine,
then rolled back clutching a bloodied elbow, his forage cap cuffed off his
head by the discharge wave of the explosion.
As the other men began to retreat up the slope Hardman holstered the
revolver in his belt, turned and ran off along the water's edge to the buildings
that merged into the jungle a hundred yards away.
Pursued by the ascending roar of the helicopter, they raced after Hardman,
Riggs and Kerans helping the injured Wilson, stumbling in and out of the potholes
left by the men ahead. At the edge of the silt flat the jungle rose in a
high green cliff, tier upon tier of fern trees and giant club moss flowering
from the terraces. Without hesitating, Hardman plunged into a narrow
interval between two ancient cobbled walls, and disappeared down the alleyway,
Macready and Caldwell twenty yards behind him.
"Keep after him, Sergeant!" Riggs bellowed when Macready paused to wait
for the Colonel. "We've nearly got him, he's beginning to tire." To Kerans he
confided: "God, what a shambles!" He pointed hopelessly at the huge figure
of Hardman pounding away in long strides. "What's driving the man on? I've
a damn good mind to let him go and get on with it."
Wilson had recovered sufficiently to walk unaided, and Kerans left him and
broke into a run. "He'll be all right, Colonel; I'll try to talk to Hardman, there's
a chance I may be able to hold him."
From the alley-way they emerged into a small square, where a group of
sedate 19th century municipal buildings looked down on an ornate fountain.
Wild orchids and magnolia entwined themselves around the grey ionic
columns of the old courthouse, a miniature sham-Parthenon with a heavy
sculptured portico, but otherwise the square had survived intact the assaults
72
of the previous fifty years, its original floor still well above the surrounding
water level. Next to the courthouse with the faceless clock tower, was a
second colonnaded building, a library or museum, its white pillars gleaming in
the sunlight like a row of huge bleached bones.
Nearing noon, the sun filled this antique forum with a harsh burning light,
and Hardman stopped and looked back uncertainly at the men following him,
then stumbled up the steps into the courthouse. Signaling to Kerans and
Caldwell, Macready backed away among the statues in the square and took up
his position behind the bowl of the fountain.
"Doctor, it's too dangerous now! He may not recognise you. We'll wait
until the heat lifts, he can't move from there. Doctor-"
Kerans ignored him. He advanced slowly across the cracked flagstones,
both forearms up over his eyes, and placed one foot insecurely on the first
step. Somewhere among the shadows he could hear Hardman's exhausted
breathing, pumping the scalding air into his lungs.
Shaking the square with its noise, the helicopter soared slowly overhead,
and Riggs and Wilson hurried up the steps into the museum entrance,
watching as the tail rotor turned the machine in a diminishing spiral. Together
the noise and the heat drummed at Kerans' brain, bludgeoning him like a
thousand clubs, clouds of dust billowing around him. Abruptly the helicopter
began to lose lift, with an agonised acceleration of its engine slid out of the air
into the square, then picked up just before it touched the ground pucking
away, Kerans sheltered with Macready behind the fountain, while the aircraft
jerked about over their heads. As it revolved, the tail rotor lashed into the
portico of the courthouse, in an explosion of splintered marble the helicopter
porpoised and plunged heavily onto the cobbles, the shattered tail propeller
rotating eccentrically. Cutting his engine, Daley sat back at his controls, half
stunned by the impact with the ground and trying helplessly to remove his
73
harness.
Frustrated at this second attempt to catch Hardman, they crouched in the
shadows below the portico of the museum, waiting for the noon high to
subside. As if illuminated by immense searchlights, a vast white glare lit the
grey stone of the buildings around the square, like an over-exposed
photograph, reminding Kerans of the chalk-white colonnades of an Egyptian
necropolis. As the sun mounted to its zenith the reflected light began to
glimmer upwards from the paving stones. Periodically, while he tended
Wilson and settled him with a few grains of morphine, Kerans could see the
other men as they kept up their watch for Hardman, fanning themselves
slowly with their forage caps.
Ten minutes later, shortly after noon, he looked up at the square.
Completely obscured by the light and glare, the buildings on the other side of
the fountain were no longer continuously visible, looming in and out of the
air like the architecture of a spectral city. In the centre of the square, by the
edge of the fountain, a tall solitary figure was standing, the pulsing thermal
gradients every few seconds inverting the normal perspectives and magnifying
him fleetingly. Hardman's sun-burnt face and black beard were now
chalkwhite, his mud-stained clothes glinting in the blinding sunlight like
sheets of gold.
Kerans pulled himself to his knees, waiting for Macready to leap forward at
him, but the Sergeant, with Riggs beside him, was buddied against a pillar, his
eyes staring blankly at the floor in front of them, as if asleep or entranced.
Stepping away from the fountain, Hardman moved slowly across the
square, in and out of the shifting curtains of light. He passed within twenty
feet of Kerans, who knelt hidden behind the column. One hand on Wilson's
shoulder, quieting the man's low grumbling. Skirting the helicopter, Hardman
reached the far end of the courthouse and there left the square, walking
74
steadily up a narrow incline towards the silt banks which stretched along the
shore a hundred yards away.
Acknowledging his escape, the intensity of the sunlight diminished
fractionally.
"Colonel Riggs!"
Macready plunged down the steps, shielding his eyes from the glare, and
pointed off across the silt flat with his Thompson. Riggs followed him,
hatless, his thin shoulders pinched together, tired and dispirited.
He put a restraining hand on Macready's elbow. "Let him go, Sergeant.
We'll never catch him now. There doesn't seem to be much point, anyway."
Safety two hundred yards away, Hardman was still moving strongly,
undeterred by the furnace-like heat. He reached the first crest, partly hidden
in the huge pails of steam which hung over the centre of the silt flat, fading
into them like a man disappearing into a deep mist. The endless banks of the
inland sea stretched out in front of him, merging at their edges into the
incandescent sky so that to Kerans he seemed to be walking across dunes of
whitehot ash into the very mouth of the sun.
For the next two hours he sat quietly in the museum, waiting for the cutter
to arrive, listening to Riggs' irritated grumbling and Daley's lame excuses.
Drained by the heat, Kerans tried to sleep, but the occasional crack of a
carbine jolted through his bruised brain like the kick of a leather boot.
Attracted by the sounds of the helicopter, a school of iguana had approached,
and the reptiles were now sidling around the edges of the square, braying at
the men on the steps of the museum. Their harsh shrieking voices filled
Kerans with a dull fear that persisted even after the cutter's arrival and their
return journey to the base. Sitting in the comparative coolness under the wire
hood, the green banks of the channel sliding past, he could hear their raucous
75
barks.
At the base he settled Wilson in the sick-bay, then sought out Dr. Bodkin
and described the events of the morning, referring in passing to the voices of
the iguanas. Enigmatically, Bodkin only nodded to himself, then remarked:
"Be warned, Robert, you may hear them again."
About Hardman's escape he made no comment.
Kerans' catamaran was still moored across the lagoon, so he decided to
spend the night in his cabin at the testing station. There be passed a quiet
afternoon, nursing a light fever in his bunk, thinking of Hardman and his
strange southward odyssey, and of the silt banks glowing like luminous gold
in the meridian sun, both forbidding and inviting, like the lost but forever
beckoning and unattainable shores of the amnionic paradise.
76
5 - Descent into Deep Time
Later that night, as Kerans lay asleep in his bunk at the testing station, the
dark waters of the lagoon outside drifting through the drowned city, the first
of the dreams came to him. He had left his cabin and walked out on to the
deck, looking down over the rail at the black luminous disc of the lagoon.
Dense palls of opaque gas swirled across the sky only a few hundred feet
overhead, through which he could just discern the faint glimmering outline of
a gigantic sun. Booming distantly, it sent dull glows pulsing across the lagoon,
momentarily lighting the long limestone cliffs which had taken the place of
the ring of white-faced buildings.
Reflecting these intermittent flares, the deep bowl of the water shone in a
diffused opalescent blur, the discharged light of myriads of phosphorescing
animalcula, congregating in dense shoals like a succession of submerged
haloes. Between them the water was thick with thousands of entwined snakes
and eels, writhing together in frantic tangles that tore the surface of the
lagoon.
As the great sun drummed nearer, almost filling the sky itself, the dense
vegetation along the limestone cliffs was flung back abruptly, to reveal the
black and stone-grey heads of enormous Triassic lizards. Strutting forward to
the edge of the cliffs, they began to roar together at the sun, the noise
gradually mounting until it became indistinguishable from the volcanic
pounding of the solar flares. Beating within him like his own pulse, Kerans
felt the powerful mesmeric pull of the baying reptiles, and stepped out into
the lake, whose waters now seemed an extension of his own blood stream. As
the dull pounding rose, he felt the barriers which divided his own cells from
the surrounding medium dissolving, and he swam forwards, spreading
outwards across the black thudding water…
He woke in the suffocating metal box of his cabin, his head splitting like a
77
burst marrow, too exhausted to open his eyes. Even as he sat on the bed,
splashing his face in the luke-warm water from the jug, he could still see the
vast inflamed disc of the spectral sun, still hear the tremendous drumming of
its beat. Timing them, he realised that the frequency was that of his own
heartbeats, but in some insane way the sounds were magnified so that they
remained just above the auditory threshold, reverberating dimly off the metal
walls and ceiling like the whispering murmur of some blind pelagic current
against the hull-plates of a submarine.
The sounds seemed to pursue him as he opened the cabin door and moved
down the corridor to the galley. It was shortly after 6 a.m. and the testing
station stirred with a faint hollowed silence, the first flares of the false dawn
illuminating the dusty reagent benches and the crates stacked under the fanlights
in the corridor. Several times Kerans paused and tried to shrug off the
echoes that persisted in his ears, uneasily wondering what was the real identity
of his new pursuers. His unconscious was rapidly becoming a well-stocked
pantheon of tutelary phobias and obsessions, homing onto his already overburdened
psyche like lost telepaths. Sooner or later the archetypes themselves
would become restive and start fighting each other, anima against persona,
ego against id…
Then he remembered that Beatrice Dahl had seen the same dream and
pulled himself together. He went out onto the deck and looked across the
slack water of the lagoon at the distant spire of the apartment block, trying to
decide whether to borrow one of the scows moored to the jetty and drive
over to her. Having now experienced one of the dreams, he realised the
courage and self-sufficiency Beatrice had displayed, brushing off the least
show of sympathy.
And yet Kerans knew that for some reason he had been reluctant to give
Beatrice any real sympathy, cutting his questions about the nightmares as
short as possible and never offering her treatment or sedative. Nor had he
78
tried to follow up any of Bodkins' or Riggs' oblique remarks about the dreams
and their danger, almost as if he had known that he would soon be sharing
them, and accepted them as an inevitable element of his life, like the image of
his own death each of them carried with him in the secret places of his heart.
(Logically for what had a more gloomy prognosis than life?-every morning
one should say to one's friends: 'I grieve for your irrevocable death', as to
anyone suffering from an incurable disease, and was the universal omission of
this minimal gesture of sympathy the model for their reluctance to discuss the
dreams?)
Bodkin was sitting at the table in the galley when Kerans entered, placidly
drinking coffee brewing in a large cracked sauce-pan on the stove. His shrewd
quick eyes watched Kerans unobtrusively as he lowered himself into a chair
and massaged his forehead slowly with a febrile hand.
"So you're one of the dreamers now, Robert. You've beheld the fata
morgana of the terminal lagoon. You look tired. Was it a deep one?
Kerans managed a rueful laugh. "Are you trying to frighten me, Alan? I
wouldn't know yet, but it felt deep enough. God, I wish I hadn't spent last
night here. There are no nightmares at the Ritz." He sipped pensively at the
hot coffee. "So that's what Riggs was talking about. How many of his men are
seeing these dreams?"
"Riggs himself doesn't, but at least half the others. And Beatrice Dahl, of
course. I've been seeing them for a full three months. It's basically the same
recurrent dream in all cases." Bodkin spoke in a slow unhurried voice, with a
softer tone than his usual blunt delivery, as if Kerans had now become a
member of a select inner group. "You've held out for a long time, Robert, it's
quite a tribute to the strength of your preconscious filters. We were all
beginning to wonder when you'd arrive." He smiled at Kerans. "Figuratively,
of course. I've never discussed the dreams with anyone. Except for Hardman,
79
and there, poor chap, the dreams were having him." As an afterthought he
added: "You spotted the sun-pulse equation? Hardman's gramophone record
was a play-back of his own pulse, amplified in the hope of precipitating the
crisis then and there. Don't think I sent him out into those jungles
deliberately."
Kerans nodded and gazed out through the window at the rounded bulk of
the floating base moored alongside. High up on the top deck Sergeant Daley,
the helicopter co-pilot, was standing motionless by the rail, staring across the
cool early morning water. Perhaps he too had just woken from the same
corporate nightmare, was filling his eyes with the olive-green spectrum of the
lagoon in the forlorn expectation of erasing the burning image of the Triassic
sun. Kerans looked down at the dark shadows below the table, seeing again
the faint glimmer of the phosphorescing pools. Distantly in his ears he could
hear the sun drumming over the sunken water. As he recovered from his first
fears he realised that there was something soothing about its sounds, almost
reassuring and encouraging like his own heartbeats. But the giant reptiles had
been terrifying.
He remembered the iguanas braying and lunging across the steps of the
museum. Just as the distinction between the latent and manifest contents of
the dream had ceased to be valid, so had any division between the real and the
super-real in the external world. Phantoms slid imperceptibly from nightmare
to reality and back again, the terrestrial and psychic landscapes were now
indistinguishable, as they had been at Hiroshima and Auschwitz, Golgotha
and Comorrah.
Skeptical of the remedy, he said to Bodkin: "You'd better lend me
Hardman's alarm clock, Alan. Or better still, remind me to take a
phenobarbitone tonight."
"Don't," Bodkin warned him firmly. "Not unless you want the impact
80
doubled. Your residues of conscious control are the only thing holding up the
dam." He buttoned his cotton jacket around his shirtless chest. "That wasn't a
true dream, Robert, but an ancient organic memory millions of years old."
He pointed to the ascending rim of the sun through the groves of
gymnospenns. "The innate releasing mechanisms laid down in your cytoplasm
millions of years ago have been awakened, the expanding sun and the rising
temperature are driving you back down the spinal levels into the drowned
seas submerged beneath the lowest layers of your unconscious, into the
entirely new zone of the neuronic psyche. This is the lumbar transfer, total
biopsychic recall. We really remember these swamps and lagoons. After a few
nights you won't be frightened of the dreams, despite their superficial horror.
That's why Riggs has received orders for us to leave."
"The Pelycosaur…?" Kerans asked.
Bodkin nodded. "The joke was on us. The reason they didn't take the
report seriously at Byrd was that ours wasn't the first to be reported."
Footsteps sounded up the companionway and moved briskly along the
metal deck outside. Colonel Riggs pushed back the double swing doors,
freshly scrubbed and breakfasted.
He waved his baton at them amiably, eyeing the litter of unwashed cups
and his two reclining subordinates.
"God, what a pig hole! Morning to you both. We've got a busy day ahead
of us so let's get our elbows off the table. I've fixed the departure time for
twelve hundred hours tomorrow, and there'll be a final embarkation stand-by
at ten hundred. I don't want to waste any more fuel than I have to, so dump
everything you can overboard. You all right, Robert?"
"Perfectly," Kerans replied flatly, sitting up.
81
"Glad to hear it. You look a bit glassy. Right, then. If you want to borrow
the cutter to evacuate the Ritz…"
Kerans listened to him automatically, watching the sun as it rose
magnificently behind the gesticulating outline of the Colonel. What
completely separated them now was the single fact that Riggs had not seen
the dream, not felt its immense hallucinatory power. He was still obeying
reason and logic, buzzing around his diminished, unimportant world with his
little parcels of instructions like a worker bee about to return to the home
nest. After a few minutes he ignored the Colonel completely and listened to
the deep subliminal drumming in his ears, half-closed his eyes so that he
could see the glimmering surface of the lake dapple across the dark underhang
of the table.
Opposite him Bodkin appeared to be doing the same, his hands folded
over his navel. During how many of their recent conversations had he in fact
been miles away?
When Riggs left, Kerans followed him to the door. "Of course, Colonel,
everything will be ready in good time. Thank you for calling."
As the cutter moved off across the lagoon he went back to his chair. For a
few minutes the two men stared across the table at each other, the insects
outside bouncing off the wire mesh as the sun lifted into the sky. At last
Kerans spoke.
"Alan, I'm not sure whether I shall be leaving."
Without replying, Bodkin took out his cigarettes. He lit one carefully, then
sat back smoking it calmly. "Do you know where we are?" he asked after a
pause. "The name of this city?" When Kerans shook his head he said: "Part of
it used to be called London, not that it matters. Curiously enough, though, I
was born here yesterday I rowed over to the old University quarter, a mass of
82
little creeks, actually found the laboratory where my father used to teach. We
left here when I was six, but I can just remember being taken to meet him one
day. A few hundred yards away there was a planetarium, I saw a performance
once-that was before they bad to re-align the projector. The big dome is still
there, about twenty feet below water. It looks like an enormous shell, fucus
growing all over it, straight out of 'The Water Babies'. Curiously, looking
down at the dome seemed to bring my childhood much nearer. To tell the
truth I'd more or less forgotten it-at my age all you have are the memories of
memories. After we left here our existence became completely nomadic, and
in a sense this city is the only home I've ever known-" He broke off abruptly,
his face suddenly tired.
"Go on," Kerans said evenly.
83
6 - The Drowned Ark
The two men moved quickly along the deck, their padded soles soundless
on the metal plates. A white midnight sky hung across the dark surface of the
lagoon, a few stationary clumps of cumulus like sleeping galleons. The low
night sounds of the jungle drifted over the water; occasionally a marmoset
gibbered or the iguanas shrieked distantly from their eyries in the submerged
office blocks. Myriads of insects festered along the water-line, momentarily
disturbed as the swells rolled in against the base, slapping at the canted sides
of the pontoon.
One by one Kerans began to cast off the restraining lines, taking advantage
of the swells to lift the loops off the rusting bollards. As the station slowly
pivoted away he looked up anxiously at the dark bulk of the base. Gradually
the three nearside blades of the helicopter came into view above the top deck,
then the slender tail rotor. He paused before releasing the last line, waiting for
Bodkin to give the all-clear from the starboard bridge.
The tension on the line had doubled, and it took Kerans several minutes to
work the metal loop up the curving lip of the bollard, the successive swells
giving him a few inches of slack as the station tilted, followed a moment later
by the base. Above him he could hear Bodkin whispering impatiently-they
had swung right around into the narrow interval of water behind them and
were now face on to the lagoon, the single light in Beatrice's penthouse
burning on its pylon. Then he cleared the lip and lowered the heavy cable into
the slack water three feet below, watching it cleave back towards the base.
Freed of its attendant burden, and with its centre of gravity raised by the
helicopter on its roof, the huge drum rolled over a full five degrees from the
vertical, then gradually regained its balance. A light in one of the cabins went
on, then flicked off again after a few moments. Kerans seized the boathook
on the deck beside him as the interval of open water widened, first to twenty
84
yards, then to fifty. A low current moved steadily through the lagoons, and
would carry them back along the shore to their former mooring.
Holding the station off from the buildings they skirted, now and then
crushing the soft fern trees sprouting through the windows, they soon
covered two hundred yards, slowing as the current diminished around the
curve, and finally lodged in a narrow inlet about a hundred feet square in size.
Kerans leaned over the rail, looking down through the dark water at the
small cinema theatre twenty feet below the surface, its flat roof luckily
uncluttered by elevator-heads or fire escapes. Waving to Bodkin on the deck
above, he stepped in through the laboratory and made his way past the
specimen tanks and sinks to the companionway leading down to the float.
Only one stop-cock had been built into the base of the float, but as he
turned the handwheel a powerful jet of cold foaming water gushed up around
his legs. By the time he returned to the lower deck, to make a final check of
the laboratory, water was already spilling ankle-deep through the scuppers,
sluicing among the sinks and benches. He quickly released the marmoset from
its fume cupboard and pushed the bushy-tailed mammal through one of the
windows. The station went down like an elevator, and he waded waistdeep to
the companionway and climbed up to the next deck where Bodkin was
exultantly watching the windows of the adjacent office blocks rise into the air.
They settled about three feet below deck level, on a flat keel with a
convenient access point by the starboard bridge. Dimly below they could hear
trapped air bubbling from the retorts and glassware in the laboratory, and a
frothy stain spread across the water from a submerged window by one of the
reagent benches.
Kerans watched the indigo bubbles fade and dissolve, thinking of the huge
semi-circle of programme charts sinking below the water as he left the
laboratory, a perfect, almost vaudevillian comment on the biophysical
85
mechanisms they sought to describe, and which perhaps symbolised the
uncertainties that lay ahead now that he and Bodkin had committed
themselves to remaining behind. They were now entering the aqua incognita,
with only a few rule of-thumb principles to guide them.
From the typewriter in his cabin Kerans took a sheet of paper, pinned it
firmly to the door of the galley. Bodkin appended his signature to the
message, and the two men went out on to the deck again and lowered Kerans'
catamaran into the water.
Paddling slowly, the outboard shipped, they glided off across the black
water, soon disappearing among the dark blue shadows along the edge of the
lagoon.
As the down-draught from its blades fanned furiously across the swimming
pool, tearing at the striped awning of the patio, the helicopter circled
deafeningly over the penthouse, plunging and diving as it searched for a
landing point. Kerans smiled to himself as he watched it through the plastic
vanes over the lounge windows, confident that the tottering pile of kerosene
drums he and Bodkin had pyramided over the roof would safely deter the
pilot. One or two of the drums toppled down on to the patio and splashed
into the pool, and the helicopter veered away and then came in more slowly,
hovering steadily.
The pilot, Sergeant Daley, swung the fuselage around so that the hatch
door faced the lounge windows, and the hatless figure of Riggs appeared in
the doorway, two of the soldiers holding on to him as he bellowed into an
electric megaphone.
Beatrice Dahl ran across to Kerans from her observation post at the far
end of the lounge, cupping her ears from the din.
"Robert, he's trying to talk to us!"
86
Kerans nodded, the Colonel's voice completely lost in the engine roar.
Riggs finished and the helicopter leaned backwards and soared away across
the lagoon, taking the noise and vibration with it.
Kerans put his arm around Beatrice's shoulders, the bare oiled skin smooth
under his fingers. 'Well, I think we have a pretty good idea what he was
saying."
They went out on to the patio, waving up to Bodkin who had appeared
from the elevator-house and was straightening the drums. Below them, on the
opposite side of the lagoon, the upper deck and bridge of the scuttled testing
station protruded from the water, a flotsam of hundreds of pieces of old notepaper
eddying away from it. Standing by the rail, Kerans pointed to the yellow
hull of the base moored by the Ritz in the furthest of the three central
lagoons.
After a futile attempt to re-float the station, Riggs had set off at noon as
planned, sending the cutter over to the apartment house where he assumed
the two biologists were hiding. Finding the elevator out of order, his men had
refused the alternative of a twenty-storey climb up the stairway-already a few
iguanas had made their homes on the lower landings-so Riggs had finally tried
to reach them with the helicopter. Balked there, he was now crashing the Ritz.
"Thank God he's left," Beatrice said fervently. "For some reason be really
got on my nerves."
"You made that pretty plain. I'm surprised he didn't take a pot shot at you."
"But, darling, he was insufferable. All that stiff upper lip stuff and dressing
for dinner in the jungle-a total lack of adaptability."
"Riggs was all right," Kerans remarked quietly. "He'll probably get by."
Now that Riggs had gone he was aware of how dependent he had been on the
87
Colonel's buoyancy and good humour. Without him the morale of the unit
would have disintegrated in an instant. It remained to be seen whether Kerans
could imbue his own little trio with the same degree of confidence and sense
of purpose. Certainly it was up to him to be the leader; Bodkin was too old,
Beatrice too self-immersed.
Kerans glanced at the thermo-alarm he wore next to his wristwatch. It was
after 3-30, but the temperature was still a hundred and ten degrees, the sun
beating against his skin like a fist. They joined Bodkin and went into the
lounge.
Resuming the action conference interrupted by the helicopter, Kerans said:
"You've got about a thousand gallons left in the roof tank, Bea, enough for
three months-or let's say two as we can expect it to get a lot hotter-and I
recommend you to close down the rest of the apartment and move into here.
You're on the north side of the patio so the elevator-house will protect you
from the heavy rains when they come in on the southerly storms. Ten to one
the shutters and air-seals along the bedroom walls will be breached. What
about food, Alan? How long will the stocks in the deep freeze last?"
Bodkin pulled a distasteful face. 'Well, as most of the lambs' tongues in
aspic have been eaten they now consist chiefly of bully beef, so you could say
'indefinitely'. However, if you're actually planning to eat the stuff-six months.
But I'd prefer iguana."
"No doubt the iguana would prefer us. All right then, that seems pretty fair.
Alan will be over in the station until the level rises, and I'll be holding out at
the Ritz. Anything else?"
Beatrice wandered away around the sofa towards the bar. "Yes, darling.
Shut up. You're beginning to sound like Riggs. The military manner doesn't
suit you."
88
Kerans threw her a mock salute and strolled over to look at the painting by
Ernst at the far end of the lounge, while Bodkin gazed down at the jungle
through the window. More and more the two scenes were coming to
resemble each other, and in turn the third nightscape each of them carried
within his mind. They never discussed their dreams, the common zone of
twilight where they moved at night like the phantoms in the Delvaux painting.
Beatrice had sat down in the sofa with her back to him, and shrewdly
Kerans guessed that the present unity of the group would not be long
maintained. Beatrice was right; the military manner did not suit him, his
personality was too passive and introverted, too self-centered. More
important, though, they were entering a new zone, where the usual obligations
and allegiances ceased to operate. Now that they had made their decision the
bonds between them had already begun to fade, and it was not simply for
reasons of convenience that they would live apart. Much as he needed
Beatrice Dahl, her personality intruded upon the absolute freedom he
required for himself. By and large, each of them would have to pursue his or
her own pathway through the time jungles, mark their own points of no
return. Although they might see one another occasionally, around the lagoons
or at the testing station, their only true meeting ground would be in their
dreams.
89
7 - Carnival of Alligators
Split by an immense roar, the early morning silence over the lagoon
shattered abruptly, and a tremendous blare of noise battered past the windows
of the hotel suite. With an effort Kerans pulled his reluctant body from his
bed and stumbled across the books scattered on the floor. He kicked back the
mesh door on to the balcony in time to see a huge white-hulled hydroplane
speed by around the lagoon, its two long stepped planes cleaving perfect slices
of glittering spray. As the heavy wash slapped against the wall of the hotel,
breaking up the colonies of water spiders and disturbing the bats nesting
among the rotting logs, he caught a glimpse of a tall, broad-shouldered man in
the cockpit, wearing a white helmet and jerkin, standing upright at the
controls.
He drove the hydroplane with an easy nonchalant swagger, accelerating the
two powerful propeller turbines mounted in front of him as the craft hit the
broad swells across the lagoon, so that it plunged and dived like a power-boat
wrestling through giant rollers, throwing up gales of rainbowing spray. The
man rolled with the surging motion of the craft, his long legs supple and
relaxed, like a charioteer completely in command of a spirited team.
Hidden by the calamites which now spilled across the balcony-the effort of
cutting them back had long seemed pointless-Kerans watched him
unobserved. As the craft sped by on its second circuit, Kerans had a glimpse
of a rakish profile, bright eyes and teeth, an expression of exhilarated
conquest.
The silver studs of a cartridge belt flashed around his waist, and when he
reached the far side of the lagoon there was a series of short explosions.
Signal shells burst over the water into ragged red umbrellas, the fragments
spitting down across the shore.
90
In a final lunge of energy, its engines screaming, the hydroplane swerved
out of the lagoon and gunned away down the canal to the next lagoon, its
wash thrashing at the foliage. Kerans gripped the balcony rail, watching the
disturbed restless water of the lagoon trying to re-settle itself, the giant
cryptograms and scale trees along the shore tossed and flurried by the still
surging air. A thin pall of red vapour drifted away to the north, fading with
the diminishing sounds of the hydroplane. The violent irruption of noise and
energy, and the arrival of this strange white-suited figure, momentarily
disconcerted Kerans, jerking him roughly from his lassitude and torpor.
In the six weeks since Riggs' departure he had lived almost alone in his
penthouse suite at the hotel, immersing himself more and more deeply in the
silent world of the surrounding jungle. The continued increase in
temperature-the thermo-alarm on the balcony now registered a noon high of
one hundred and thirty degrees-and the enervating humidity made it almost
impossible to leave the hotel after ten o'clock in the morning; the lagoons and
the jungle were filled with fire until four o'clock, by then he was usually too
tired to do anything but return to bed.
All day he sat by the shuttered windows of the suite, listening from the
shadows to the shifting movement of the mesh cage, as it expanded and
contracted in the heat. Already many of the buildings around the lagoon had
disappeared beneath the proliferating vegetation; huge club mosses and
calamites blotted out the white rectangular faces, shading the lizards in their
window lairs.
Beyond the lagoon the endless tides of silt had begun to accumulate in
enormous glittering banks, here and there over-topping the shoreline, like the
immense tippings of some distant gold-mine. The light drummed against his
brain, bathing the submerged levels below his consciousness, carrying him
downwards into warm pellucid depths where the nominal realities of time and
space ceased to exist. Guided by his dreams, he was moving backwards
91
through the emergent past, through a succession of ever stranger landscapes,
centered upon the lagoon, each of which, as Bodkin had said, seemed to
represent one of his own spinal levels. At times the circle of water was
spectral and vibrant, at others slack and murky, the shore apparently formed
of shale, like the dull metallic skin of a reptile. Yet again the soft beaches
would glow invitingly with a glossy carmine sheen, the sky warm and limpid,
the emptiness of the long stretches of sand total and absolute, filling him with
an exquisite and tender anguish.
He longed for this descent through archaeopsychic time to reach its
conclusion, repressing the knowledge that when it did the external world
around him would have become alien and unbearable.
Sometimes he restlessly made a few entries in his botanical diary about the
new plant forms, and during the first weeks called several times on Dr.
Bodkin and Beatrice Dahl. But both were increasingly preoccupied with their
own descents through total time. Bodkin bad become lost in his private
reverie, punting aimlessly around the narrow creeks in search for the
submerged world of his childhood. Once Kerans came across him resting on
an oar in the stern of his small metal scow and gazing vacantly at the
unyielding buildings around him. He had stared straight through Kerans,
failing to acknowledge his call.
However, with Beatrice, despite their superficial estrangement, there was an
intact underlying union, a tacit awareness of their symbolic roles.
More signal shells burst over the distal lagoon, containing the station and
Beatrice's apartment house, and Kerans shielded his eyes as the bright fireballs
studded the sky. A few seconds later, several miles away among the silt
banks to the south, there was a series of answering bursts, faint puffs that
soon dispersed.
So the stranger driving the hydroplane was not alone. At the prospect of
92
this imminent invasion Kerans pulled himself together. The distance
separating the answering signals was wide enough to indicate that there was
more than one group, and that the hydroplane was merely a scout vehicle.
Sealing the mesh door behind him, he stepped back into the suite, pulling
his jacket off the chair. Out of habit he went into the bathroom and stood in
front of the mirror, absently feeling the week-old stubble on his face. The hair
was white as pearl, and with his ebony tan and introspective eyes gave him the
appearance of a refined beachcomber. A bucket-full of dingy water had leaked
in from the wrecked still on the roof, and he scooped some out and splashed
his face, a token toilet performed, as far as he could see, solely out of habit.
Using the metal-tipped boathook to drive away two small iguanas idling on
the jetty, he slid the catamaran into the water and cast off, the little outboard
carrying him steadily through the sluggish swells. Huge clumps of algae stirred
below the craft, and stick-beetle and water spider raced around its prows. It
was a few minutes after seven o'clock, and the temperature was only eighty
degrees, comparatively cool and pleasant, the air free of the enormous clouds
of mosquito which would later be roused from their nests by the heat.
As he navigated the hundred-yard-long creek leading into the southern
lagoon, more signal rockets were exploding overhead, and he could hear the
hydroplane zooming to and fro, occasionally glimpse the white-suited figure
at its controls as it flashed past. Kerans cut the outboard at the entrance to
the lagoon and glided quietly through the overhanging fern fronds, watching
for water snakes disturbed from the branches by the surging wash.
Twenty-five yards along the shore he berthed the catamaran among the
horse-tails growing on the shelving roof of a department store, waded up the
sloping concrete to a fire escape on the side of the adjacent building. He
climbed the five storeys to the flat rooftop and lay down behind a low
pediment, glancing up at the nearby bulk of Beatrice's apartment house.
93
The hydroplane was circling noisily by an inlet on the far side of the
lagoon, the driver plunging it backwards and forwards like a horseman reining
his steed. More flares were going up, some only a quarter of a mile away. As
he watched Kerans noticed a low but mounting roar, a harsh animal sound
not unlike that emitted by the iguanas. It drew nearer, mingled with the drone
of engines, followed by the noise of vegetation being torn and buffeted. Sure
enough, along the course followed by the inlet, the huge fern trees and
calamites were flung down one after the other, their branches waving as they
fell like vanquished standards. The whole jungle was being torn apart. Droves
of bats erupted into the air and scattered frantically across the lagoon, their
screeching masked by the accelerating turbines of the hydroplane and the
exploding star-shells.
Abruptly, the water in the mouth of the inlet rose several feet into the air,
what seemed to be an enormous log-jam crushed down it, tearing the
vegetation away, and burst out into the lagoon. A miniature niagara of
foaming water cascaded outwards, impelled by the pressure of the tidal bore
behind it, on which rode several square black-hulled craft similar to Colonel
Riggs' cutter, paint peeling from the giant dragon eyes and teeth slashed
across their bows. Manned by a dozen dusky-skinned figures in white shorts
and singlets, the scows jockeyed out towards the centre of the lagoon, the last
of the star-shells still going up from their decks in the general melee and
excitement.
Half-deafened by the noise, Kerans stared down at the vast swarm of long
brown forms swimming powerfully through the seething water, their massive
tails lashing the foam. By far the largest alligators he had seen, many of them
over twenty-five feet long, they jostled together ferociously as they fought
their way into the clear water, churning in a pack around the now stationary
hydroplane. The white-suited man was standing in the open hatchway, hands
on hips, gazing exultantly at this reptilian brood. He waved lazily at the crews
of the three scows, then gestured in a wide circle at the lagoon, indicating that
94
they would anchor there.
As his negro lieutenants re-started their engines and drifted off towards the
bank, he surveyed the surrounding buildings with a critical eye, his strong face
raised almost jauntily to one side. The alligators congregated like hounds
around their master, the wheeling cries of the dense cloud of sentinel birds
overhead, nile plover and stone curlew, piercing the morning air. More and
more of the alligators joined the pack, cruising shoulder to shoulder in a
clockwise spiral, until at least two thousand were present, a massive group
incarnation of reptilian evil.
With a shout, the pilot swung back to his controls, the two thousand
snouts lifting in recognition. The propellers kicked into life and lifted the
hydroplane forward across the water. Its sharp planes ploughing straight
across the hapless creatures in their path, it drove away towards the
communicating creek into the next lagoon, the great mass of alligators surging
along behind it. A few detached themselves and cruised off in pairs around
the lagoon, ferreting among the submerged windows and driving off the
iguanas who had come out to watch. Others glided among the buildings and
took up their positions on the barely covered rooftops. Behind them, in the
centre of the lagoon, the beaten water churned uneasily, occasionally throwing
up the snow-white belly of a dead alligator crushed by the hydroplane.
As the advancing armada headed towards the creek on his left, Kerans
scrambled down the fire escape and splashed down the sloping roof to the
catamaran. Before he could reach it the heavy wash set up by the hydroplane
had rocked the craft adrift, and it floated off into the oncoming mass. Within
a few seconds it was engulfed, up-ended by the press of alligators fighting to
get into the creek and cut to pieces in their snapping jaws.
A large caiman bringing up the rear spotted Kerans waist-deep among the
horse-tails and veered towards him, its eyes steadying. Its rough scaly back
95
and the crest along its tail flexed powerfully as it surged through the water.
Quickly Kerans retreated up the slope, slipping once to his shoulders, reached
the fire escape as the caiman lumbered out of the shallows on its short
hooked legs and lunged at his leaping feet.
Panting, Kerans leaned on the rail, looking down at the cold unblinking
eyes which regarded him dispassionately.
"You're a well-trained watchdog," he told it ungrudgingly. He eased a loose
brick from the wall and launched it with both hands at the knob on the end
of the caiman's snout, grinning as it bellowed and backed off, snapping
irritably at the horse-tails and a few drifting spars of the catamaran.
After half an hour, and a few minor duels with the retreating iguanas, he
managed to cross the intervening two hundred yards of shoreline and reach
Beatrice's apartment house. She met him as he stepped out of the elevator,
wide-eyed with alarm.
"Robert, what's happening?" She put her hands on his shoulders and
pressed her head against his damp shirt. "Have you seen the alligators? There
are thousands of them!"
"Seen them-I was damn nearly eaten by one on your doorstep." Kerans
released himself and hurried over to the window, pushed back the plastic
vanes. The hydroplane had entered the central lagoon and was circling it at
speed, the shoal of alligators following in its wake, those at the tail breaking
off to station themselves at points around the shore. At least thirty or forty
had remained in the lagoon below, and were cruising about slowly in small
patrols, occasionally swerving on a careless iguana.
"Those devilish things must be their watch-guards," Kerans decided. "Like
a tame troupe of tarantulas. Nothing better, when you come to think of it."
96
Beatrice stood beside him, nervously fingering the collar of the jade silk
shirt she wore over her black swimsuit. Although the apartment was
beginning to look ramshackle and untidy, Beatrice continued to tend her own
appearance devotedly. On the few occasions when Kerans called she would
be sitting on the patio or before a mirror in her bedroom, automatically
applying endless layers of patina like a blind painter forever retouching a
portrait he can barely remember for fear that otherwise he will forget it
completely. Her hair was always dressed immaculately, the make-up on her
mouth and eyes exquisitely applied, but her withdrawn, isolated gaze gave her
the waxen, glacé beauty of an inanimate mannequin. At last, however, she had
been roused.
"But who are they, Robert? That man in the speed-boat frightens me. I
wish Colonel Riggs was here."
"He'll be a thousand miles away by now, if he hasn't already reached Byrd.
Don't worry, Bea. They may look a piratical crew, but there's nothing we can
give them."
A large three-decker paddle-boat, paddles set fore and aft, had entered the
lagoon, and was slowly moving over to the three scows drawn up a few yards
from where Riggs' base had been moored. It was loaded with gear and cargo,
decks crammed with large bales and canvas-swathed machinery, so that there
was only six inches of freeboard amidships.
Kerans guessed that this was the group's depot ship, and that they were
engaged, like most of the other freebooters still wandering through the
Equatorial lagoons and archipelagoes, in pillaging the drowned cities,
reclaiming the heavy specialised machinery such as electrical power generators
and switchgear that had been perforce abandoned by the government.
Nominally such looting was highly penalised, but in fact the authorities were
only too eager to Payagenerous price for any salvage.
97
"Look!"
Beatrice gripped Kerans' elbow. She pointed down at the testing station,
where the rumpled, shaggy-haired figure of Dr. Bodkin stood on the roof,
waving slowly at the men on the bridge of the paddle-boat. One of them, a
bare-chested negro in white slacks and a white peaked cap, began to shout
back through a hailer.
Kerans shrugged. "Alan's right. We've everything to gain by showing
ourselves. If we help them they'll soon push off and leave us alone."
Beatrice hesitated, but Kerans took her arm. The hydroplane, now free of
its entourage, was crossing the central lagoon on its return, leaping lightly
through the water on a beautiful wake of foam.
"Come on, if we get down to the jetty in time he'll probably give us a lift."
98
8 - The Man with the White Smile
His handsome saturnine face regarding them with a mixture of suspicion
and amused contempt, Strangman lounged back under the cool awning that
shaded the poop deck of the depot ship. He had changed into a crisp white
suit, the silk-like surface of which reflected the gilt plate of his high-backed
Renaissance throne, presumably dredged from some Venetian or Florentine
lagoon, and invested his strange personality with an almost magical aura.
"Your motives seem so complex, Doctor," he remarked to Kerans. "But
perhaps you've given up hope of understanding them yourself. We shall label
them the total beach syndrome and leave it at that.
He snapped his fingers at the steward standing in the shadows behind him
and selected an olive from the tray of small chow. Beatrice, Kerans and
Bodkin sat in a semi-circle on the low couches, alternately chilled and roasted
as the erratic air-conditioner above them varied its perimeter. Outside, half an
hour before noon, the lagoon was a bowl of fire, the scattered light almost
masking the tall apartment house on the opposite bank. The jungle was
motionless in the immense heat, the alligators hiding in whatever shade they
could find.
Nonetheless several of Strangman's men were messing about in one of the
scows, unloading some heavy diving equipment under the direction of a huge
hunchbacked negro in a pair of green cotton shorts. A giant grotesque parody
of a human being, now and then he took off his eye-patch to bellow abuse at
them, and the mingled grunts and curses drifted across the steaming air.
"But tell me, Doctor," Strangman pressed, apparently dissatisfied with
Kerans' answers, "when do you finally propose to leave?"
Kerans hesitated, wondering whether to invent a date. After waiting an
99
hour for Strangman to change, he had offered their greetings to him and tried
to explain why they were still there. However, Strangman seemed unable to
take the explanation seriously, swinging abruptly from amusement at their
naivety to sharp suspicion. Kerans watched him carefully, reluctant to make
even the smallest false move. Whatever his real identity, Strangman was no
ordinary freebooter. A curious air of menace pervaded the depot ship, its
crew and their master. Strangman in particular, with his white smiling face, its
cruel lines sharpening like arrows when he grinned, disturbed Kerans.
"We haven't really considered the possibility," Kerans said. "I think we all
hope to stay on indefinitely. We have small stocks of supplies."
"But my dear man," Strangman remonstrated, "the temperature will soon
be up to nearly two hundred degrees. The entire planet is rapidly returning to
the Mesozoic Period."
"Precisely," Dr. Bodkin cut in, rousing himself for a moment from his
introspection. "And insofar as we are part of the planet, a piece of the main,
we too are returning. This is our zone of transit, here we are re-assimilating
our own biological pasts. That's why we have chosen to remain here. There is
no ulterior motive, Strangman."
"Of course not, Doctor, I completely respect your sincerity." Shifts of
mood seemed to cross and re-cross Strangman's face, making him look in
turn irritable, amiable, bored and abstracted. He listened to an air-line
pumping from the scow, then asked: "Dr. Bodkin, did you live in London as a
child? You must have many sentimental memories to recapture, of the great
palaces and museums." He added: "Or are the only memories you have preuterine
ones?"
Kerans looked up, surprised at the ease with which Strangman had
mastered Bodkin's jargon. He noticed that Strangman was not only watching
Bodkin shrewdly, but also waiting for any reaction from himself and Beatrice.
100
But Bodkin gestured vaguely. "No, I'm afraid I remember nothing. The
immediate past is of no interest to me."
"What a pity," Strangman rejoined archly. "The trouble with you people is
that you've been here for thirty million years and your perspectives are all
wrong. You miss so much of the transitory beauty of life. I'm fascinated by
the immediate past-the treasures of the Triassic compare pretty unfavourably
with those of the closing years of the Second Millennium."
He leaned around on one elbow and smiled at Beatrice, who sat with her
hands discreetly covering her bare knees, like a mouse observing a particularly
fine cat. "And what about you, Miss Dahl? You look a little melancholy. A
touch of time-sickness, perhaps? The chronoclasmic bends?" He chuckled,
amused by this sally, and Beatrice said quietly:
"We're usually rather tired here, Mr. Strangman. By the way, I don't like
your alligators."
"They won't hurt you." Strangman leaned back and surveyed the trio. "It's
all very strange." Over his shoulder he rapped a short command at the
steward, then sat frowning to himself. Kerans realised that the skin of his face
and hands was uncannily white, devoid altogether of any pigmentation.
Kerans' heavy sunburn, like that of Beatrice and Dr. Bodkin, made him
virtually indistinguishable from the remainder of the negro crew, and the
subtle distinctions between the mulattos and quadroons had vanished.
Strangman alone retained his original paleness, the effect emphasised by the
white suit he had chosen.
The bare-chested negro in the peaked cap appeared, sweat rolling across his
powerful muscles. He was about six feet in height, but the rolling breadth of
his shoulders made him seem stocky and compact. His manner was
deferential and observant, and Kerans wondered how Strangman managed to
101
maintain his authority over the crew, and why they accepted his harsh, callous
tone.
Strangman introduced the negro curtly. "This is the Admiral, my chief
whip. If I'm not around when you want me, deal with him." He stood up,
stepping down from the dais. "Before you leave, let me take you on a brief
tour of my treasure ship." He extended an arm gallantly to Beatrice, who took
it timorously, his eyes glinting and rapacious.
At one time, Kerans surmised, the depot ship had been a gambling steamer
and floating vice den, moored beyond the five-mile limit outside Messina or
Beirut, or in the shelter of some estuarine creek under the binder, more
tolerant skies south of the equator. As they left the deck a squad of men were
lowering an ancient ornamental gangway to the water's edge, its banisters of
peeling gilt shaded by a white clapboard marquee painted with gold tassels
and drapery, creaking about on its pulleys like a funicular gazebo. The interior
of the ship was decorated in a similar pastiche baroque. The bar, now dark
and closed, at the forward end of the observation deck was like the stern
castle of a ceremonial galleon, naked gilt caryatids supporting its portico.
Semi-columns of fake marble formed little loggias that led away to the private
alcoves and dining rooms, while the divided central stairway was a bad film
set of Versailles, an aerial riot of dusty cupids and candelabra, the grimy brass
overlayed with mould and verdigris.
But the former roulette wheels and chemin de fer tables had gone, and the
scarred parquet flooring was covered with a mass of crates and cartons, piled
up against the wire mesh windows so that only a faint reflection of the light
outside seeped through. Everything was well packed and sealed, but on an old
mahogany chart table in one corner Kerans saw a collection of bronze and
marble limbs and torsos, fragments of statuary waiting to be sorted.
Strangman paused at the bottom of the staircase, tearing off a strip of
102
fading tempera from one of the murals. "The place is falling to bits. Hardly up
to the standard of the Ritz, Doctor. I envy your good sense."
Kerans shrugged. "It's a low-rent area now." He waited as Strangman
unlocked a door, and they entered the main storehold, a dim stifling cavern
packed with large wooden crates, the floor strewn with sawdust. They were
no longer in the refrigerated section of the ship, and the Admiral and another
sailor followed them closely, continually hosing them with ice-cold air from a
faucet on the wall. Strangman snapped his fingers and the Admiral quickly
began to pull away the canvas wrappings draped between the crates.
In the thin light Kerans could just see the glimmering outline of a huge
ornamented altarpiece at the far end of the hold, fitted with elaborate scrollwork
and towering dolphin candelabra, topped by a neo-classical proscenium
which would have covered a small house. Next to it stood a dozen pieces of
statuary, mostly of the late Renaissance, stacks of heavy gilt frames propped
against them. Beyond these were several smaller altarpieces and triptychs, an
intact pulpit in panelled gold, three large equestrian statues, a few strands of
sea-weed still entwined in the horses' manes, several pairs of enormous
cathedral doors, embossed in gold and silver, and a large tiered marble
fountain. The metal shelves around the side of the hold were loaded with
smaller bric a brac: votive urns, goblets, shields and salvers, pieces of
decorative armour, ceremonial inkstands and the like.
Still holding Beatrice's arm, Strangman gestured expansively a few yards
ahead. Kerans heard him say 'Sistine Chapel' and 'Medici Tomb' but Bodkin
muttered: "Aesthetically, most of this is rubbish, picked for the gold content
alone. Yet there's not much of that. What is the man up to?"
Kerans nodded, watching Strangman in his white suit, the barelegged
Beatrice beside him. Suddenly he remembered the Delvaux painting, with its
tuxedoed skeletons. Strangman's chalk-white face was like a skull, and he had
103
something of the skeleton's jauntiness. For no reason he began to feel an
intense distaste for the man, his hostility more generalised than personal.
"Well, Kerans, what do you think of them?" Strangman pivoted at one end
of the aisle and swung back, barking at the Admiral to cover the exhibits
again. "Impressed, Doctor?"
Kerans managed to take his eyes off Strangman's face and glanced at the
looted relics.
"They're like bones," he said flatly.
Baffled, Strangman shook his head. "Bones? What on earth are you talking
about? Kerans, you're insane! Bones, Good God!"
As he let out a martyred groan, the Admiral took up the refrain, first saying
the word quietly to himself as if examining a strange object, then repeating it
more and more rapidly in a sort of nervous release, his broad face gibbering
with laughter. The other sailor joined in, and together they began to chant it
out, convulsed over the fire hose like snake dancers.
"Bones! Yes, man, dem's all bones! Dem bones dem bones dem…!"
Strangman watched them angrily, the muscles of his face locking and
unlocking like manacles. Disgusted with this display of rudeness and bad
temper, Kerans turned to leave the hold. In annoyance Strangman rushed
after him, pressed the palm of his hand in Kerans' back and propelled him
along the aisle out of the hold.
Five minutes later, as they drove off in one of the scows, the Admiral and
half a dozen other members of the crew lined the rail, still chanting and
dancing. Strangman had regained his humour, and stood coolly in his white
suit, detached from the others, waving ironically.
104
9 - The Pool of Thanatos
During the next two weeks, as the southern horizon became increasingly
darkened by the approaching rain-clouds, Kerans saw Strangman frequently.
Usually he would be driving his hydroplane at speed around the lagoons, his
white lounge suit exchanged for overalls and helmet, supervising the work of
the salvage teams. One scow, with six men, was working in each of the three
lagoons, the divers methodically exploring the sunken buildings. Occasionally
the placid routines of descent and pump would be interrupted by the sounds
of rifle fire as an alligator venturing too near the divers was dispatched.
Sitting in the darkness in his hotel suite, Kerans was far away from the
lagoon, content to let Strangman dive for his loot as long as he would soon
leave. More and more the dreams had begun to encroach on his waking life,
his conscious mind becoming increasingly drained and withdrawn. The single
plane of time on which Strangman and his men existed seemed so transparent
as to have a negligible claim to reality. Now and then, when Strangman came
to call on him, he would emerge for a few minutes on to this tenuous plane,
but the real centre of his consciousness was elsewhere.
Curiously, after his initial irritation, Strangman had developed a sneaking
liking for Kerans. The biologist's quiet, angular mind was a perfect target for
Strangman's dry humour. At times he would subtly mimic Kerans, earnestly
taking his arm during one of their dialogues and saying in a pious voice: "You
know, Kerans, leaving the sea two hundred million years ago may have been a
deep trauma from which we've never recovered…"
On another occasion he sent two of his men over in a skiff to the lagoon;
on one of the largest buildings on the opposite bank they painted in letters
thirty feet high:
TIME ZONE
105
Kerans took this banter in good part, ignoring it when the divers' lack of
success made it more severe. Sinking backwards through the past, he waited
patiently for the coming of the rain.
It was after the diving party arranged by Strangman that Kerans first
realised the true nature of his fear of the man.
Ostensibly the party had been devised by Strangman as a social function to
bring the three exiles together. In his laconic, off-hand way Strangman had
begun to lay siege to Beatrice, deliberately cultivating Kerans as a means of
securing an easy entree to her apartment. When he discovered that the
members of the trio rarely saw each other he evidently decided on an
alternative approach, bribing Kerans and Bodkin with the promise of his wellstocked
cuisine and cellar. Beatrice, however, always refused these invitations
to luncheon and midnight breakfast-Strangman and his entourage of alligators
and one-eyed mulattos still frightened her-and the parties were invariably
cancelled.
But the real reason for his 'diving gala' was more practical. For some time
he had noticed Bodkin punting around the creeks of the former university
quarter-often the old man, much to his amusement, would be trailed around
the narrow canals by one of the dragon-eyed scows, manned by the Admiral
or Big Caesar and camouflaged with fern fronds, like a lost carnival float-and
attributing his own motives to others, assumed that Bodkin was searching for
some long-buried treasure. The focus of his suspicions finally became fixed
on the submerged planetarium, the one underwater building to which there
was easy access. Strangman posted a permanent guard over the little lake,
some two hundred yards to the south of the central lagoon, which contained
the planetarium, but when Bodkin failed to appear at the dead of night in
flippers and aqualung Strangman lost patience and decided to anticipate him.
"We'll pick you up at seven tomorrow morning," he told Kerans.
106
"Champagne cocktails, cold buffet, we'll really find out what old Bodkin has
got hidden down there."
"I can tell you, Strangman. Just his lost memories. They're worth all the
treasure in the world to him."
But Strangman had let out a peal of skeptical laughter, roared away in the
hydroplane and left Kerans hanging helplessly to the switchblading jetty.
Promptly at seven the next morning the Admiral had come for him. They
collected Beatrice and Dr. Bodkin and then repaired to the depot ship, where
Strangman was completing his preparations for the dive. A second scow was
filled with diving equipment-both aqualung and suit-pumps and a telephone.
A diving cage hung from the davit, but Strangman assured them that the lake
was free of iguanas and alligators and there was no need to remain in the cage
underwater.
Kerans was skeptical of this, but for once Strangman was as good as his
word. The lake had been cleared completely. Heavy steel grilles had been
lowered into the water at the submerged entrances, and armed guards sat with
harpoons and shotguns astride the booms. As they entered the lake and
moored against a shaded waterside balcony on the eastern side the last of a
series of grenades was being tossed into the water, the sharp pulsing
explosions spewing up a flotsam of stunned eels, shrimp and somasteroids,
which were promptly raked away to one side.
The cauldron of submerged foam dispersed and cleared, and from their
seats by the rail they looked down at the wide domed roof of the planetarium,
wreathed in strands of fucus, as Bodkin had said like a giant shell-palace from
a childhood fairy tale. The circular fan light at the apex of the dome was
covered by a retractable metal screen, and an attempt had been made to lift
one of the sections, but to Strangman's chagrin they had long since rusted
into place. The main entrance of the dome was at the original street level, too
107
far down to be visible, but a preliminary reconnaissance had revealed that they
would be able to enter without difficulty.
As the sunlight rose across the water Kerans gazed down into the green
translucent depths, at the warm amnionic jelly through which he swam in his
dreams. He remembered that despite its universal superabundance he had not
fully immersed himself in the sea for ten years, and mentally recapitulated the
motions of the slow breaststroke that carried him through the water while he
slept.
Three feet below the surface a small albino python swam past, searching
for a way out of the enclosure. Watching its strong head swerve and dart as it
evaded the harpoons, Kerans felt a momentary reluctance to entrust himself
to the deep water. On the other side of the lake, behind one of the steel
grilles, a large estuarine crocodile was wrestling with a group of sailors trying
to drive it off. Big Caesar, his great legs clamped to the narrow sill of the
boom, kicked savagely at the amphibian, which snapped and lunged at the
spears and boathooks. Over thirty feet long, it was well over ninety years old,
and measured six or seven feet in chest diameter. Its snow-white under-belly
reminded Kerans that he had seen a curiously large number of albino snakes
and lizards since Strangman's arrival, appearing from the jungle as if attracted
by his presence. There had even been a few albino iguanas. One had sat on
his jetty the previous morning, watching him like an alabaster lizard, and he
had automatically assumed that it bore a message from Strangman.
Kerans looked up at Strangman, who stood in his white suit in the bows of
the vessel, watching expectantly as the crocodile thrashed and slammed
against the grille, almost toppling the giant negro into the water. Strangman's
sympathies were all too obviously with the crocodile, but not for any reasons
of sportsmanship or from a sadistic desire to see one of his principal
lieutenants gored and killed.
108
Finally, amid a confusion of shouts and curses, a shotgun was passed to Big
Caesar, who steadied himself and discharged both barrels into the hapless
crocodile below his feet. With a bellow of pain, it backed away into the
shallows, its tail smacking the water.
Beatrice and Kerans looked away, waiting for the coup de grace to be
administered, and Strangman swarmed along the rail in front of them, eager
for a better vantage point.
"When they're trapped or dying they smack the water as an alarm signal to
each other." He put a forefinger on Beatrice's cheek, as if trying to make her
face the spectacle. "Don't look so disgusted. Kerans! Damn it, show more
sympathy for the beast. They've existed for a hundred million years, they're
among the oldest creatures on the planet."
After the animal had been dispatched he still stood elatedly by the rail,
bouncing on the balls of his feet, as if hoping that it would resuscitate itself
and make a come-back. Only when the decapitated head was hoisted away on
the end of a boathook did he turn with a spasm of irritation to the business of
the dive.
Under the supervision of the Admiral, two of the crew made a preliminary
dive in aqualungs. They climbed down the metal ladder into the water and
glided away towards the sloping curve of the dome. They examined the
fanlight, then tested the semicircular ribs of the building, pulling themselves
across the dome by the cracks in the surface. After their return a third sailor
descended, with suit and line. He clumped slowly across the cloudy floor of
the street below, the thin light reflected off his helmet and shoulders. As the
lines wound out, he entered the main doorway and disappeared from view,
communicating by telephone with the Admiral, who sang out his commentary
for all to hear in a rich fruity baritone. "in de pay-box… now in de main
lounge… Jomo says de seats in de church, Captain Strang', but de altar gone."
109
Everyone was leaning over the rail, waiting for Jomo to reappear, but
Strangman was slumped back moodily in his chair, face clamped in one hand.
"Church!" he snorted derisively. "God! Send someone else down. Jomo's a
bloody fool."
"Yes, Captain."
More divers descended, and the first champagne cocktails were brought
round by the steward. Intending to dive himself, Kerans sipped lightly at the
heady effervescence.
Beatrice touched his elbow, her face watchful. "Are you going down,
Robert?"
Kerans smiled. "To the basement, Bea. Don't worry, I'll use the big suit, it's
perfectly safe."
"I wasn't thinking of that." She looked up at the expanding ellipse of the
sun just visible over the rooftop behind them. The olive-green light refracted
through the heavy fern fronds filled the lake with a yellow, swampy miasma,
drifting over the surface like vapour off a vat. A few moments earlier the
water had seemed cool and inviting, but now had become a closed world, the
barrier of the surface like a plane between two dimensions. The diving cage
was swung out and lowered into the water, its red bars blurred and
shimmering, so that the entire structure was completely distorted. Even the
men swimming below the surface were transformed by the water, their bodies
as they swerved and pivoted turned into gleaming chimeras, like exploding
pulses of ideation in a neuronic jungle.
Far below them, the great dome of the planetarium hove out of the yellow
light, reminding Kerans of some cosmic space vehicle marooned on Earth for
millions of years and only now revealed by the sea. He leaned behind Beatrice
110
and said to Bodkin: "Alan, Strangman's searching for the treasure you've
hidden down there."
Bodkin smiled fleetingly. "I hope he finds it," he said mildly. "The entire
ransom of the Unconscious is waiting for him if he can."
Strangman was standing in the bows of the craft, interrogating one of the
divers who had surfaced and was now being helped out of his suit, water
streaming off his copper skin across the deck. As he barked his questions he
noticed Bodkin and Kerans whispering to each other. Brows knitting, he
stalked across the deck to where they were sitting, watching them suspiciously
through halfclosed eyes, and then sidled behind them like a guard eyeing a trio
of potentially troublesome prisoners.
Toasting him with his glass of champagne, Kerans said jocularly: "I was just
asking Dr. Bodkin where he'd hidden his treasure, Strangman."
Strangman paused, staring at him coldly as Beatrice laughed uneasily, hiding
her face inside the wing collars of her beach shirt. He put his hands on the
back of Kerans' wicker chair, his face like white flint. "Don't worry, Kerans,"
he snapped softly. "I know where it is, and I don't need your help to find it."
He swung round on Bodkin. "Do I, Doctor?"
Shielding one ear from the cutting edge of his voice, Bodkin murmured: "I
think you probably do know, Strangman." He pushed his chair back into the
shrinking shade. "When does the gala begin?"
"Gala?" Strangman glanced about irritably, apparently forgetting that he
had introduced the term himself. "There are no bathing beauties here,
Doctor, this isn't the local aquadrome. Wait a minute, though, I mustn't be
ungallant and forget the beautiful Miss Dahl." He bowed over her with an
unctuous smile. "Come, my dear, I'll make you queen of the aquacade, with an
escort of fifty divine crocodiles."
111
Beatrice looked away from his gleaming eyes. "No thanks, Strangman. The
sea frightens me."
"But you must. Kerans and Dr. Bodkin expect you to. And I. You'll be a
Venus descending to the sea, made twice beautiful by your return." He
reached down to take her hand and Beatrice flinched from him, frowning
with repugnance at his oleaginous smirk. Kerans pivoted in his seat and held
her arm.
"I don't think this is Beatrice's day, Strangman. We only swim in the
evenings, under a full moon. It's a question of mood, you know."
He smiled at Strangman as the latter tightened his grip on Beatrice, his face
like a white vampire's, as if becoming exasperated beyond all measure.
Kerans stood up. "Look, Strangman, I'll take her place. All right? I'd like to
go down and have a look at the planetarium." He waved Beatrice's alarms
aside. "Don't worry, Strangman and the Admiral will take good care of me."
"Of course, Kerans." Strangman's good humour had returned, instantly he
radiated a benevolent willingness to please, only the slightest hint in his eyes
of his pleasure at having Kerans within his clutches. 'We'll put you in the big
suit, then you can talk to us over the loudspeaker. Relax, Miss Dahl, there's no
danger. Admiral! Suit for Dr. Kerans! Chop, chop!"
Kerans exchanged a brief warning glance with Bodkin, then looked away
when he saw Bodkin's surprise at the alacrity with which he had volunteered.
He felt curiously light-headed, though he had barely touched his cocktail.
"Don't go down for too long, Robert," Bodkin called after him. "The
temperature of the water will be high, at least ninety-five degrees, you'll find it
very enervating."
112
Kerans nodded, then followed Strangman's eager stride to the forward
deck. A couple of men were hosing down the suit and helmet, while the
Admiral and Big Caesar, and the sailors resting on the pump-wheels, watched
Kerans approach with noncommittal interest.
"See if you can get down into the main auditorium," Strangman told him.
"One of the boys managed to find a slit in an exit door, but the frame had
rusted solid." He examined Kerans with a critical eye as he waited for the
helmet to be lowered over his head. Designed for use only within the first five
fathoms, it was a complete perspex bowl, braced by two lateral ribs, and
affording maximum visibiity. "It suits you, Kerans, you look like the man
from inner space." The rictus of a laugh twisted his face. "But don't try to
reach the Unconscious, Kerans, remember it isn't equipped to go down that
far!"
Clumping slowly to the rail, the sailors carrying the lines after him, Kerans
paused to wave cumbersomely to Beatrice and Dr. Bodkin, then mounted the
narrow ladder and lowered himself slowly towards the slack green water
below. It was shortly after eight o'clock and the sun shone directly on to the
tacky vinyl envelope that enclosed him, clamming damply against his chest
and legs, and he looked forward with pleasure to cooling his burning skin.
The surface of the lake was now completely opaque. A litter of leaves and
weed floated slowly around it, occasionally disrupted by bubbles of trapped
air erupting from the interior of the dome.
To his right he could see Bodkin and Beatrice with their chins on the rail,
watching him expectantly. Directly above, on the roof of the scow, stood the
tall gaunt figure of Strangman, tails of his jacket pushed back, arms akimbo,
the light breeze lifting his chalkwhite hair. He was grinning soundlessly to
himself, but as Kerans' feet touched the water shouted something which
Kerans heard dimly relayed over the headphones. Immediately the hiss of air
through the intake valves in the helmet increased and the internal circuit of
113
the microphone came alive.
The water was hotter than he expected. Instead of a cool revivifying bath,
he was stepping into a tank filled with warm, glutinous jelly that clamped itself
to his calves and thighs like the foetid embrace of some gigantic protozoan
monster. Quickly he lowered himself to his shoulders, then took his feet off
the rungs and let his weight carry him slowly downwards into the greenlit
deep, hand over hand along the rail, and paused at the two-fathom mark.
Here the water was cooler, and he flexed his arms and legs thankfully,
accustoming his eyes to the pale light. A few small angel fish swam past, their
bodies gleaming like silver stars in the blue blur that extended from the
surface to a depth of five feet, a 'sky' of light reflected from the millions of
dust and pollen particles. Forty feet away from him loomed the pale curved
hull of the planetarium, far larger and more mysterious than it had seemed
from the surface, like the stern of an ancient sunken liner. The once polished
aluminium roof had become dull and blunted, mollusks and bivalves clinging
to the narrow ledges formed by the transverse vaulting. Lower down, where
the dome rested on the square roof of the auditorium, a forest of giant fucus
floated delicately from their pedestals, some of the fronds over ten feet tall,
exquisite marine wraiths that fluttered together like the spirits of a sacred
neptunian grove.
Twenty feet from the bottom the ladder ended, but Kerans was now
almost at equilibrium with the water. He let himself sink downwards until he
was holding the tips of the ladder above his head with his fingers, then
released them and glided away backwards towards the lake floor, the twin
antennae of his air-line and telephone cable winding up the narrow well of
light, reflected by the disturbed water, to the silver rectangular hull of the
scow.
Cut off by the water from any other sounds, the noise of the air pump and
114
the relayed rhythms of his own respiration drummed steadily in his ears,
increasing in volume as the air pressure was raised. The sounds seemed to
boom around him in the dark olivegreen water, thudding like the immense
tidal pulse he had heard in his dreams.
A voice grated from his headphones. "Strangman here, Kerans. How's the
grey sweet mother of us all?"
"Feels like home. I've nearly reached the bottom now. The diving cage is
over by the entrance."
He sank to his knees in the soft loam which covered the floor, and steadied
himself against a barnacled lamp post. In a relaxed, graceful moon-stride he
loped slowly through the deep sludge, which rose from his footprints like
clouds of disturbed gas. On his right were the dim flanks of the buildings
lining the side-walk, the silt piled in soft dunes up to their first-floor windows.
In the intervals between the buildings the slopes were almost twenty feet high,
and the retaining grilles were locked into them like huge portcullises. Most of
the windows were choked with debris, fragments of furniture and metal
cabinets, sections of full boards, matted together by the fucus and
cephalopods.
The diving cage swung slowly on its cable five feet off the street, a selection
of hacksaws and spanners loosely tied to the floor. Kerans approached the
doorway of the planetarium, steering the lines behind him and occasionally
pulled lightly off his feet when they became over-extended.
Like an immense submarine temple, the white bulk of the planetarium
stood before him, illuminated by the vivid surface water. The steel barricades
around the entrance had been dismantled by the previous divers, and the
semi-circular arc of doors which led into the foyer was open. Kerans switched
on his helmet lamp and walked through the entrance. He peered carefully
among the pillars and alcoves, following the steps which led up into the
115
mezzanine. The metal railings and chromium display panels had rusted, but
the whole interior of the planetarium, sealed off by the barricades from the
plant and animal life of the lagoons, seemed completely untouched, as clean
and untarnished as on the day the last dykes had collapsed.
Passing the ticket booth, he propelled himself slowly along the mezzanine,
and paused by the rail to read the signs over the cloakroom doors, their
luminous letters reflecting the light. A circular corridor led around the
auditorium, the lamp throwing a pale cone of light down the solid black
water. In the faint hope that the dykes would be repaired, the management of
the planetarium had sealed a second inner ring of barricades around the
auditorium, locked into place by padlocked cross-bars which had now rusted
into immovable bulkheads.
The top right-hand corner panel of the second bulkhead had been jimmied
back to provide a small peephole into the auditorium. Too tired by the water
pressing on his chest and abdomen to lift the heavy suit, Kerans contented
himself with a glimpse of a few motes of light gleaming through the cracks in
the dome.
On his way to fetch a hacksaw from the diving cage, he noticed a small
doorway at the top of a short flight of steps behind the ticket box, apparently
leading over the auditorium, either a cineprojectionist's booth or the
manager's office. He pulled himself up the handrail, the metal cleats of his
weighted boots skating on the slimy carpet. The door was locked, but he
drove his shoulders against it and the two hinges parted easily, the door
gliding away gracefully across the floor like a paper sail.
Pausing to free his lines, Kerans listened to the steady pumping in his ears.
The rhythm had changed perceptibly, indicating that a different pair of
operators had taken over the job. They worked more slowly, presumably
unaccustomed to pumping air at the maximum pressure. For some reason,
116
Kerans felt a slight stirring of alarm. Although fully aware of Strangman's
malice and unpredictability, he felt confident that he would not try to kill him
by so crude a method as blocking the air supply. Both Beatrice and Bodkin
were present, and although Riggs and his men were a thousand miles away
there was always the chance that some specialist government unit might pay a
flying visit to the lagoons. Unless he killed Beatrice and Bodkin as well-which
seemed unlikely, for a number of reasons (he obviously suspected them of
knowing more about the city than they admitted)-Strangman would find
Kerans' death more trouble than it was worth.
As the air hissed reassuringly through his helmet, Kerans moved forward
across the empty room. A few shelves sagged from one wall, a filing cabinet
loomed in a corner. Suddenly, with a shock of alarm, he saw what appeared to
be a man in an immense ballooning spacesuit facing him ten feet away, white
bubbles streaming from his frog-like head, hands raised in an attitude of
menace, a blaze of light pouring from his helmet.
"Strangman!" he shouted at it involuntarily.
"Kerans! What is it?" Strangman's voice, closer than the whisper of his own
consciousness, cut across his panic. "Kerans, you fool…!"
"Sorry, Strangman." Kerans pulled himself together, and advanced slowly
towards the approaching figure. "I've just seen myself in a mirror. I'm up in
the manager's office or control room, I'm not sure which. There's a private
stairway from the mezzanine, may be an entrance into the auditorium."
"Good man. See if you can find the safe. It should be behind the picture
frame directly over the desk."
Ignoring him, Kerans placed his hands on the glass surface and swung the
helmet sharply from left to right. He was in the control booth overlooking the
auditorium, his image reflected in the glass sound-proof panel. In front of
117
him was the cabinet which had once held the instrument console, but the unit
had been removed, and the producer's swing-back seat faced out
unobstructed like an insulated throne of some germ-obsessed potentate.
Almost exhausted by the pressure of the water, Kerans sat down in the seat
and looked out over the circular auditorium.
Dimly illuminated by the small helmet lamp, the dark vault with its blurred
walls cloaked with silt rose up above him like a huge velvet-upholstered
womb in a surrealist nightmare. The black opaque water seemed to hang in
solid vertical curtains, screening the dais in the centre of the auditorium as if
hiding the ultimate sanctum of its depths. For some reason the womb-like
image of the chamber was reinforced rather than diminished by the circular
rows of seats, and Kerans heard the thudding in his ears uncertain whether he
was listening to the dim subliminal requiem of his dreams. He opened the
small panel door which led down into the auditorium, disconnecting the
telephone cable from his helmet so that he would be free of Strangman's
voice.
A light coating of silt covered the carpeted steps of the aisle. In the centre
of the dome the water was at least twenty degrees warmer than it had been in
the control room, heated by some freak of convection, and it bathed his skin
like hot balm. The projector had been removed from the dais, but the cracks
in the dome sparkled with distant points of light, like the galactic profiles of
some distant universe. He gazed up at this unfamiliar zodiac, watching it
emerge before his eyes like the first vision of some pelagic Cortez emerging
from the oceanic deeps to glimpse the immense Pacifics of the open sky.
Standing on the dais, he looked around at the blank rows of seats facing
him, wondering what uterine rite to perform for the invisible audience that
seemed to watch him. The air pressure inside his helmet had increased
sharply, as the men on the deck lost contact with him by telephone. The
valves boomed off the sides of the helmet, the silver bubbles darted and
118
swerved away from him like frantic phantoms.
Gradually, as the minutes passed, the preservation of this distant zodiac,
perhaps the very configuration of constellations that had encompassed the
Earth during the Triassic Period, seemed to Kerans a task more important
than any other facing him. He stepped down from the dais and began to
return to the control room, dragging the air-line after him. As he reached the
panel door he felt the line snake out through his hands, and with an impulse
of anger seized a loop and anchored it around the handle of the door. He
waited until the line tautened, then wound a second loop around the handle,
providing himself with a radius of a dozen feet. He walked back down the
steps and stopped half-way down the aisle, head held back, determined to
engrave the image of the constellations on his retina. Already their patterns
seemed more familiar than those of the classical constellations. In a vast,
convulsive recession of the equinoxes, a billion sidereal days had reborn
themselves, re-aligned the nebulae and island universes in their original
perspectives.
A sharp spur of pain drove itself into his eustachian tube, forcing him to
swallow. Abruptly he realised that the intake valve of the helmet supply was
no longer working. A faint hiss seeped through every ten seconds, but the
pressure had fallen steeply. Dizzying, he stumbled up the aisle and tried to
free the air-line from the handle, certain now that Strangman had seized the
opportunity to fabricate an accident. Breath exploding, he tripped over one of
the steps, fell awkwardly across the seats with a gentle ballooning motion.
As the spotlight flared across the domed ceiling, illuminating the huge
vacant womb for the last time, Kerans felt the warm bloodfilled nausea of the
chamber flood in upon him. He lay back, spreadeagled across the steps, his
hand pressed numbly against the loop of line around the door handle, the
soothing pressure of the water penetrating his suit so that the barriers
between his own private blood-stream and that of the giant amnion seemed
119
no longer to exist. The deep cradle of silt carried him gently like an immense
placenta, infinitely softer than any bed he had ever known. Far above him, as
his consciousness faded, he could see the ancient nebulae and galaxies shining
through the uterine night, but eventually even their light was dimmed and he
was only aware of the faint glimmer of identity within the deepest recesses of
his mind. Quietly he began to move towards it, floating slowly towards the
centre of the dome, knowing that this faint beacon was receding more rapidly
then he could approach it. When it was no longer visible he pressed on
through the darkness alone, like a blind fish in an endless forgotten sea,
driven by an impulse whose identity be would never comprehend…
Epochs drifted. Giant waves, infinitely slow and enveloping, broke and fell
across the sunless beaches of the time-sea, washing him helplessly in its
shallows. He drifted from one pool to another, in the limbos of eternity, a
thousand images of himself reflected in the inverted mirrors of the surface.
Within his lungs an immense inland lake seemed to be bursting outwards, his
rib-cage distended like a whale's to contain the oceanic volumes of water.
"Kerans…"
He looked up at the bright deck, at the brilliant panoply of light on the
canvas shade above him, at the watchful ebony face of the Admiral sitting
across his legs and pumping his chest in his huge hands.
"Strangman, he…" Choking on the expressed fluid in his throat, Kerans let
his head loll back onto the hot deck, the sunlight stinging his eyes. A circle of
faces looked down at him intently- Beatrice, her eyes wide with alarm, Bodkin
frowning seriously, a motley of brown faces under khaki kepis. Abruptly a
single white grinning face interposed itself. Only a few feet from him, it leered
like an obscene statue.
"Strangman, you-"
120
The grin broke into a winning smile. "No, I didn't, Kerans. Don't try to pin
the blame on me. Dr. Bodkin will vouch for that." He waggled a finger at
Kerans. "I warned you not to go down too far."
The Admiral stood up, evidently satisfied that Kerans had recovered. The
deck seemed to be made of burning iron, and Kerans pulled himself up on
one elbow, sat weakly in the pool of water. A few feet away, creased in the
scuppers, the suit lay like a deflated corpse.
Beatrice pushed through the circle of onlookers, and crouched down
beside him. "Robert, relax, don't think about it now." She put her arm around
his shoulders, glancing up watchfully at Strangman. He stood behind Kerans,
grinning with pleasure, hands on hips,
"The cable seized…" Kerans cleared his head, his lungs like two bruised,
tender flowers. He breathed slowly, soothing them with the cool air. "They
were pulling it from above. Didn't you stop…"
Bodkin stepped forward with Kerans' jacket and draped it across his
shoulders. "Easy, Robert, it doesn't matter now. Actually, I'm sure it wasn't
Strangman's fault, he was talking to Beatrice and me when it happened. The
cable was hooked round some obstruction, it looks as if it was a complete
accident."
"No, it wasn't, Doctor," Strangman cut in. "Don't perpetuate a myth,
Kerans will be much more grateful for the truth. He anchored that cable
himself, quite deliberately. Why?" Here Strangman tapped the air
magisterially. "Because he wanted to become part of the drowned world." He
began to laugh to himself, slapping his thighs with amusement as Kerans
hobbled weakly to his chair. "And the joke is that he doesn't know whether
I'm telling the truth or not. Do you realise that, Bodkin? Look at him, he
genuinely isn't sure! God, what irony!"
121
"Strangman!" Beatrice snapped at him angrily, overcoming her fears. "Stop
saying that! It might have been an accident."
Strangman shrugged theatrically. "It might," he repeated with great
emphasis. "Let's admit that. It makes it more interesting- particularly for
Kerans. ' Did I or did I not try to kill myself?' One of the few existential
absolutes, far more significant than 'To be or not to be?', which merely
underlines the uncertainty of the suicide, rather than the eternal ambivalence
of his victim." He smiled down patronisingly at Kerans as the latter sat quietly
in his chair, sipping at the drink Beatrice had brought him. "Kerans, I envy
you the task of finding out-if you can."
Kerans managed a weak smile. From the speed of his recovery he realised
that he had suffered only mildly from the drowning. The remainder of the
crew had moved away to their duties, no longer interested.
"Thank you, Strangman. I'll let you know when I have the answer."
On the way back to the Ritz he sat silently in the stern of the scow,
thinking to himself of the great womb-chamber of the planetarium and the
multilayered overlay of its associations, trying to erase from his mind the
terrible 'either/or' which Strangman had correctly posed. Had he
unconsciously locked the air-pipe, knowing that the tension in the cable
would suffocate him, or had it been a complete accident, even, possibly, an
attempt by Strangman to injure him? But for the rescue by the two skin divers
(perhaps he had counted on them setting out after him when the telephone
cable was disconnected) he would certainly have found the answer. His
reasons for making the dive at all remained obscure. There was no doubt that
he had been impelled by a curious urge to place himself at Strangman's mercy,
almost as if he were staging his own murder.
During the next few days the conundrum remained unsolved. Was the
drowned world itself, and the mysterious quest for the south which had
122
possessed Hardman, no more than an impulse to suicide, an unconscious
acceptance of the logic of his own devolutionary descent, the ultimate
neuronic synthesis of the archaeopsychic zero? Rather than try to live with yet
another enigma, and more and more frightened of the real role that
Strangman played in his mind, Kerans systematically repressed his memories
of the accident. Likewise, Bodkin and Beatrice ceased to refer to it, as if
accepting that an answer to the question would solve for them many of the
other mysterious enigmas which now alone sustained them, delusions which,
like all the ambiguous but necessary assumptions about their own
personalities, they would only sacrifice with reluctance.
123
10 - Surprise Party
"Kerans…!"
Roused by the deep blare of the hydroplane as it approached the landing
stage, Kerans stirred fretfully, his head lolling from side to side on the stale
pillow. He focused his eyes on the bright green parallelograms which dappled
the ceiling above the venetian blinds, listening to the engines outside reverse
and accelerate, then with an effort pulled himself off the bed. It was already
after 7-30, an hour later than he had woken a month earlier, and the brilliant
sunlight reflected off the lagoon thrust its fingers into the darkened room like
a ravenous golden monster.
With a pang of annoyance he noticed that he had forgotten to switch off
the bedside fan before going to sleep. He had begun to fall asleep now at
unpredictable moments, sometimes sitting halfupright on the bed while
unlacing his shoes. In an attempt to conserve his fuel he had closed down the
bedroom and moved the heavy gilt-framed double bed into the lounge, but its
associations with sleep were so powerful that he was soon forced to move it
back again.
"Kerans…!"
Strangman's voice echoed warningly down the corridor below. Kerans
limped slowly to the bathroom, managed to splash his face by the time
Strangman let himself into the suite.
Tossing his helmet on to the floor, Strangman produced a decanter of hot
black coffee and a canned gorgonzola green with age.
"A present for you." He examined Kerans' dulled eyes with an amiable
frown. 'Well, how are things in deep time?"
124
Kerans sat on the edge of the bed, waiting for the booming of the phantom
jungles in his mind to fade. Like an endless shallows, the residues of the
dreams stretched away below the surface of the reality around him. 'What
brings you here?" he asked flatly.
Strangman put on an expression of deep injury.
"Kerans, I like you. You keep forgetting that." He turned up the volume of
the air-conditioner, smiling at Kerans, who gazed watchfully at the wry,
perverted leer. "Actually I have another motive-I want you to have dinner
with me tonight. Don't start shaking your bead. I have to keep coming here,
it's time I returned your hospitality. Beatrice and old Bodkin will be there, it
should be pretty swagger-firework displays, bongo drums and a surprise."
"What exactly?"
"You'll see. Something really spectacular, believe me, I don't do things by
halves. I'd have those 'gators dancing on the tips of their tails if I wanted to."
He nodded solemnly. "Kerans, you're going to be impressed. And it may even
do you some good mentally, stop this crazy time machine of yours." His
mood changed, becoming distant and abstracted. "But I mustn't poke fun at
you, Kerans, I couldn't bear a tenth of the personal responsibility you've
shouldered. The tragic loneliness, for example, of those haunted Triassic
swamps." He picked a book off the air-conditioner, a copy of Donne's
poems, and extemporised a line: 'World within world, each man an island
unto himself, swimming through seas of archipelagoes…"
Fairly certain that he was fooling, Kerans asked: "How's the diving going?"
"Frankly, not very well. The city's too far north for much to have been left.
But we've discovered a few interesting things. You'll see tonight."
Kerans hesitated, doubting whether he would have enough energy to make
125
small talk with Dr. Bodkin and Beatrice-he had seen neither of them since the
debacle of the diving party, though every evening Strangman drove over in his
hydroplane to Beatrice's apartment house (what success he had Kerans could
only guess, but Strangman's references to her-"Women are like spiders, they
sit there watching you and knitting their webs" or "she keeps talking about
you, Robert, confound her"-indicated a negative response).
However, the particular twist of emphasis in Strangman's voice suggested
that Kerans' attendance was obligatory, and that he would not be allowed to
refuse. Strangman followed him into the lounge, waiting for a reply.
"It's rather short notice, Strangman."
"I'm terribly sorry, Kerans, but as we know each other so well I felt sure
you wouldn't mind. Blame it on my manic-depressive personality, I'm always
seizing on wild schemes."
Kerans found two gold-plated porcelain coffee cups and filled them from
the decanter. Know each other so well, he repeated to himself ironically. I'm
damned if I know you at all, Strangman. Racing around the lagoons like the
delinquent spirit of the drowned city, apotheosis of all its aimless violence and
cruelty, Strangman was half-buccaneer, half-devil. Yet he had a further
neuronic role, in which he seemed almost a positive influence, holding a
warning mirror up to Kerans and obliquely cautioning him about the future
he had chosen. It was this bond that kept them together, for otherwise
Kerans would long since have left the lagoon and moved southwards.
"I assume this isn't a farewell celebration?" he asked Strangman. "You
aren't leaving us?"
"Kerans, of course not," Strangman remonstrated. "We've only just got
here. Besides," he added sagely, "where would we go? There's nothing much
left now-I can tell you, I sometimes feel like Phiebas the Phoenician. Though
126
that's really your role, isn't it?
"- A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool."
He continued to pester Kerans until the latter accepted his invitation, then
made off jubilantly. Kerans finished the coffee in the decanter, when he began
to recover drew the venetian blinds and let in the bright sunlight.
Outside, in his chair on the veranda, a white monitor lizard sat and
regarded him with its stony eyes, waiting for something to happen.
As he rode across the lagoon to the paddle-ship that evening, Kerans
speculated on the probable nature of Strangman's 'surprise', hoping that it
would not be some elaborate practical joke. The effort of shaving off his
beard and putting on a white dinner jacket had tired him.
Considerable preparations were obviously afoot in the lagoon. The depot
ship had been moored about fifty yards from shore, strung with awnings and
coloured lights, and the two remaining SCOWS were working systematically
along the banks, driving the alligators into the central lagoon.
Kerans pointed to a big caiman thrashing about in a circle of boathooks,
and said to Big Caesar: "What's on the menu tonight- roast alligator?"
The giant hunch-backed mulatto at the helm of the scow shrugged with
studied vagueness. "Strang' got a big show tonight, Mistah Kerans, a real big
show. You see."
127
Kerans left his seat and leaned on the bridge. "Big Caesar, how long have
you known the Captain?"
"Long time, Mistah Kerans. Ten years, maybe twenty."
"He's a strange one, all right," Kerans continued. "His moods change so
quickly-you must have noticed that, working for him. Sometimes he frightens
me."
The big mulatto smiled cryptically. "You right there, Mistah Kerans," he
rejoined with a chuckle. "You really right."
But before Kerans could press him a megaphone jabbed at them across the
water from the bridge of the depot ship.
Strangman met each one of his guests as they arrived at the head of the
gangway. In high spirits, he managed a sustained mood of charm and good
cheer, complimenting Beatrice elaborately on her appearance. She wore a fulllength
blue brocade ball dress, the turquoise mascara around her eyes making
her look like some exotic bird of paradise. Even Bodkin had contrived to trim
his beard and salvage a respectable linen jacket, an old piece of crepe around
his neck a ragged concession to a black tie. Like Kerans, however, they both
seemed glazed and remote, joining in the conversation over dinner
automatically.
Strangman, however, failed to notice this, or if he did was too elated and
preoccupied to care. Whatever his motives, he had obviously gone to
considerable trouble to stage his surprise. A fresh canvas awning had been
broken out like a crisp white sail over the observation deck, flared at its rim in
the form of an inverted marquee to give them an uninterrupted view over the
lagoon and sky. A large circular dining table stood by the rail, low divans in
the Egyptian style, with spiral gilt and ivory bolsters, disposed around it. A
clutter of unmatched but nonetheless brilliant pieces of gold and silver dining
128
plate decorated the table, much of it of huge proportions-the ormolu fingerbowls
were the size of face baths.
Strangman had rifled his treasure house below in an access of profligacyseveral
pieces of blackened bronze statuary stood about behind the table
bearing salvers of fruit and orchids, and an immense canvas by some painter
of the school of Tintoretto had been propped against the funnels and
screened the service hatches, looming down over the table like a mural. Its
title was 'The Marriage of Ester and King Xerxes' but the pagan treatment
and the local background of the Venetian lagoon and the Grand Canal
palazzos, coupled with the Quincento decor and costume, made it seem more
like 'The Marriage of Neptune and Minerva,' no doubt the moral Strangman
intended to point. King Xerxes, a wily, beak-nosed elderly Doge or Venetian
Grand-Admiral, already seemed completely tamed by his demure, ravenhaired
Ester, who had a faint but nonetheless perceptible likeness to Beatrice.
As he cast his eyes over the crowded spread of the canvas with its hundreds
of wedding guests, Kerans suddenly saw another familiar profile-the face of
Strangman among the hard cruel smiles of the Council of Ten-but when he
approached the painting the similarity vanished.
The marriage ceremony was being celebrated aboard a galleon moored
against the Doge's Palace, and its elaborate rococo rigging seemed to merge
directly into the steel hawzers and bracing lines of the depot ship. Apart from
the kindred settings, emphasised by the two lagoons and the buildings rising
from the water, Strangman's motley crew might themselves have stepped
straight from the canvas, with its jeweled slaves and negro captain of
gondoliers.
Sipping his cocktail, Kerans said to Beatrice: "Do you see yourself there,
Bea? Obviously, Strangman hopes you'll subdue the floodwaters with the
same skill Ester used to pacify the King."
129
"Correct, Kerans!" Strangman stepped over to them from the bridge. "You
have it exactly." He bowed to Beatrice. "I hope you accept the compliment,
my dear?"
"I'm very flattered, Strangman, of course." Beatrice moved over to the
painting, examining her double, then turned in a swirl of brocade and stood
by the rail, staring out over the water. "But I'm not sure whether I want to be
cast in that role, Strangman."
"But you are, Miss Dahl, inescapably." Strangman gestured the steward
over to Bodkin, who was sitting in a quiet reverie, then slapped Kerans on the
shoulder. "Believe me, Doctor, you'll soon see-"
"Good. I'm getting a little impatient, Strangman."
"What, after thirty million years you can't wait five minutes? I'm obviously
bringing you back to the present."
Throughout the meal Strangman supervised the succession of wines, taking
advantage of his absences from the table to confer with the Admiral. With the
final brandies before them, Strangman sat down apparently for the last time,
winking broadly at Kerans. Two of the scows had moved over to the inlet by
the far side of the lagoon and disappeared into its mouth, while the third took
up its position in the centre, from where it released a small firework display.
The last sunlight still lay over the water, but had faded sufficiently for the
bright catherine wheels and rockets to flicker and dazzle, their sharp
explosions etched clearly against the tinted crepuscular sky. The smile on
Strangman's face grew broader and broader, until he lay back on his
chesterfield grinning soundlessly to himself, the red and green flashes
illuminating his saturnine features.
Uncomfortably, Kerans leaned forward to ask him when their surprise
130
would materialise, but Strangman anticipated him.
"Well, haven't you noticed?" He glanced around the table. "Beatrice? Dr.
Bodkin? You three are slow. Come out of deep time for a moment."
A curious silence hung over the ship, and involuntarily Kerans leaned
against the rail to brace himself in case Strangman was about to set off an
underwater explosive charge. Glancing down at the deck below, he suddenly
saw the twenty or thirty members of the crew, looking motionlessly at the
lagoon, their ebony faces and white singlets flickering with the ghostly light,
like the crew of a spectral ship.
Puzzled, Kerans searched the sky and lagoon. The dusk had come in rather
more quickly than he expected, the curtain walls of the buildings opposite
sinking into shadow. At the same time the sky remained clear and visible in
the sunset, the tops of the surrounding vegetation brilliantly tinted.
A low drumming sounded somewhere in the distance, the airpumps which
had worked all day and whose noise had been masked by the pyrotechnic
display. Around the ship the water had become strangely slack and lifeless, the
low swells that usually disturbed it absent. Wondering whether an exhibition
of underwater swimming had been arranged for a troupe of trained alligators,
he peered down at the surface.
"Alan! Look, for heaven's sake! Beatrice, can you see?" Kerans kicked back
his chair and leapt to the rail, pointing down in amazement at the water. "The
level is going down!"
Looming just below the dark pellucid surface were the dim rectangular
outlines of the submerged buildings, their open windows like empty eyes in
enormous drowned skulls. Only a few feet from the surface, they drew closer,
emerging from the depths like an immense intact Atlantis. First a dozen, then
a score of buildings appeared to view, their cornices and fire escapes clearly
131
visible through the thinning refracting glass of the water. Most of them were
only four or five storeys high, part of a district of small shops and offices
enclosed by the taller buildings that had formed the perimeter of the lagoon.
Fifty yards away the first of the roofs broke surface, a blunted rectangle
smothered with weeds and algae, across which slithered a few desperate fish.
Immediately half a dozen others appeared around it, already roughly
delineating a narrow street. The upper line of windows emerged, water spilling
from their ledges, fucus draped from the straggling wires that sagged across
the roadways.
Already the lagoon had vanished. As they sank slowly downwards, settling
into what seemed to be a large open square, they were now looking across a
diffuse straggle of rooftops, punctuated by eroded chimneys and spires, the
flat sheet of the surface transformed into a jungle of cubist blocks, at its
boundaries merging into the higher ground of the enveloping vegetation.
What remained of the water had formed into distinct channels, dark and
somber, eddying away around corners and into narrow alleyways.
"Robert! Stop it! It's horrible!" Kerans felt Beatrice seize his arm, her long
blue nails biting through the fabric of his dinner jacket. She gazed out at the
emerging city, an expression of revulsion on her tense face, physically repelled
by the sharp acrid smells of the exposed water-weeds and algae, the damp
barnacled forms of rusting litter. Veils of scum draped from the criss-crossing
telegraph wires and tilting neon signs, and a thin coating of silt cloaked the
faces of the buildings, turning the once limpid beauty of the underwater city
into a drained and festering sewer.
For a moment Kerans fought to free his mind, grappling with this total
inversion of his normal world, unable to accept the logic of the rebirth before
him. First he wondered whether there had been a total climatic reversal that
was shrinking the formerly expanding seas, draining the submerged cities. If
132
so, he would have to make his way back to this new present, or be marooned
millions of years away on the beach of some lost Triassic lagoon. But deep
within his mind the great sun pounded dimly with a strength still
undiminished, and beside him he heard Bodkin mutter:
"Those pumps are powerful. The water is going down by a good two or
three feet a minute. We're not far from the bottom now. The whole thing's
fantastic!"
Laughter rocked out into the darkening air as Strangman rolled about
mirthfully on the chesterfield, dabbing his eyes with a napkin. Released from
the tension of staging the spectacle, he was now exulting in the three
bewildered faces at the rail. On the bridge above him, the Admiral watched
with dry amusement, the fading light glinting across his bare chest like a gong.
Two or three men below were taking in the mooring lines, holding the
orientation of the ship in the square.
The two scows which had moved over to the creek mouth during the
firework display were floating behind a massive boom, and a foaming mass of
water poured from the twin vents of a huge pumping system. Then the
rooftops obscured their view across the interval, and the people on the deck
were looking up at the blanched buildings of the square. Only fifteen or
twenty feet of water remained, and a hundred yards away down one of the
side streets they could see the third scow wending tentatively below the
trailing Wires.
Strangman controlled himself and came over to the rail. "Perfect, don't you
agree, Dr. Bodkin? What a jest, a really superb spectacle! Come on, Doctor,
don't look so piqued, congratulate me! It wasn't too easy to arrange."
Bodkin nodded and moved away along the rail, his face still stunned.
Kerans asked: "But how did you seal off the perimeter? There's no
Continuous wall around the lagoon."
133
"There is now, Doctor. I thought you were the expert in marine biology.
The fungi growing in the swamp mud outside consolidated the entire mass,
for the last week there's only been one point of influx, took us five minutes to
dam it up."
He gazed out brightly at the emerging streets in the dim light around them,
the humped backs of cars and buses appearing through the surface. Giant
anemones and star-fish flopped limply in the shallows, collapsing kelp
straggled out of windows.
Numbly, Bodkin said: "Leicester Square."
His laughter vanishing, Strangman swung on him, his eyes peering
rapaciously at the neon-covered porticos of the hulks of former cinemas and
theatres.
"So you do know your way around here, Doctor! A pity you couldn't have
helped us before, when we were getting nowhere." He slammed the rail with
an oath, jarring Kerans' elbow. "By Cod, though, we're really in business
now!" With a snarl he flung himself away from them, kicking back the dining
table, shouting up at the Admiral.
Beatrice watched him disappear below with alarm, a slender hand on her
throat. "Robert, he's insane. What are we going to do- he'll drain all the
lagoons."
Kerans nodded, thinking about the transformation of Strangman which he
had witnessed. With the reappearance of the submerged streets and buildings
his entire manner had changed abruptly. All traces of courtly refinement and
laconic humour had vanished, he was now callous and vulpine, the renegade
spirit of the hoodlum streets returning to his lost playground. It was almost as
if the presence of the water had anaesthetised him, smothering his true
134
character so that only the surface veneer of charm and moodiness remained.
Behind them the shadow of an office block fell across the deck, drawing a
diagonal curtain of darkness over the huge painting. A few figures, Ester and
the negro captain of gondoliers, still remained, and a single white face, a
beardless member of the Council of Ten. As Strangman had prophesied,
Beatrice had performed her symbolic role, and Neptune had deferred and
withdrawn.
Kerans looked up at the round bulk of the testing station, poised on the
cinema behind them like an enormous boulder on the edge of a cliff.
Apparently eighty to ninety feet higher, the tall buildings around the lagoon
perimeter now cut off half the sky, enclosing them in a dim canyon-floor
world.
"It doesn't matter that much," Kerans temporised. He steadied her against
his arm as the ship touched bottom and rolled slightly, crushing a small car
under the port bow. 'When he's finished stripping the stores and museums
they'll leave. Anyway, the rain-storms will be here in a week or two."
Beatrice cleared her throat distastefully, wincing as the first bats flickered
among the rooftops, darting from one dripping eave to another. "But it's all
so hideous. I can't believe that anyone ever lived here. It's like some imaginary
city of hell. Robert, I need the lagoon."
"Well, we could leave and move south across the silt flats. What do you
think, Alan?"
Bodkin shook his head slowly, still staring out blankly at the darkened
buildings around the square. "You two go, I must stay here."
Kerans hesitated. "Alan," he warned him gently. "Strangman has everything
he needs now. We're useless to him. Soon we'll simply be unwelcome guests."
135
But Bodkin ignored him. He looked down at the streets, hands clasping the
rail like an old man at the counter of some vast store, shopping for the
memories of his childhood.
The streets had almost been drained. The approaching scow ran aground
on the sidewalk, pushed off again and then stuck finally on a traffic island.
Led by Big Caesar, the three-men crew jumped down into the waist-deep
water and waded noisily towards the depot ship, splashing water excitedly into
the open shop-fronts.
With a jolt the paddle-ship settled itself firmly on the bottom, cheers and
shouts going up from Strangman and the rest of the crew as they fended off
the snapping overhead wires and tilted tale-graph poles. A small dinghy was
thrown into the water, and to a chorus of fists pounding a drum-beat on the
rail the Admiral rowed Strangman across the shallow pool to the fountain in
the centre of the square. Here Strangman debarked, pulled a flare pistol from
a pocket of his dinner jacket and with an exultant shout began to fire salvo
after salvo of coloured star-shells into the air overhead.
136
11 - "The Ballad of Mistah Bones"
Half an hour later Beatrice, Kerans and Dr. Bodkin were able to walk out
into the streets. Huge pools of water still lay about everywhere, leaking from
the ground floors of the buildings, but they were little more than two or three
feet deep. There were clear stretches of pavement over a hundred yards long,
and many of the further streets were completely drained. Dying fish and
marine plants expired in the centre of the roadways, and huge banks of black
sludge were silted up into the gutters and over the sidewalks, but fortunately
the escaping waters had cut long pathways through them.
Strangman at their head, racing along in his white suit, firing star-shells into
the dark streets, the crew charged off in a bellowing pack, those in front
balancing a rum keg on their upturned palms, the others brandishing an
assortment of bottles, machetes and guitars. A few derisive shouts of 'Mistah
Bones!' faded around Kerans as he helped Beatrice down off the gangway,
and then the trio were left alone in the silence of the huge stranded paddleship.
Glancing up uncertainly at the high distant ring of the jungle looming out
of the darkness like the encircling lip of an extinct volcanic cone, Kerans led
the way across the pavement to the nearest buildings. They stood in the
entrance to one of the huge cinemas, sea urchins and cucumbers flickering
faintly across the tiled floor, sand dollars flowering in the former ticket booth.
Beatrice gathered her skirt in one hand, and they moved slowly down the
line of cinemas, past cafes and amusement arcades, patronised now only by
the bivalves and mollusks. At the first corner they turned away from the
sounds of revelry coming from the other side of the square, and walked
westwards down the dim dripping canyons. A few star-shells continued to
explode overhead, and the delicate glass sponges in the doorways glowed
softly as they reflected the pink and blue light.
137
"Coventry Street, Haymarket…" Kerans read off the rusting Street signs.
They stepped quickly into a doorway as Strangman and his pack charged back
across the square in a blaze of light and noise, machetes slashing at the rotting
boards over the shop-fronts.
"Let's hope they find something that satisfies them," Bodkin murmured.
He searched the crowded skyline, as if looking for the deep black water that
had once covered the buildings.
For several hours they wandered like forlorn elegant ghosts through the
narrow streets, occasionally meeting one of the roistering crew, ambling
drunkenly along the centre of the roadway with the remains of some fading
garment in one hand, a machete in the other. A few small fires had been
started in the centre of the street junctions, groups of two or three men
warming themselves over the flaring tinder.
Avoiding these, the trio made their way across the nexus of streets to the
south shore of the sometime lagoon, where Beatrice's apartment house rose
up into the darkness, the penthouse lost among the stars.
"You'll have to walk the first ten storeys," Kerans told Beatrice. He pointed
to the deep bank of silt which reached upwards in a damp concave slope to
the fifth floor windows, part of an immense massif of coagulated loam which,
as Strangman had described, now encircled the lagoon and formed an
impenetrable dyke against the encroaching sea. Down the side-streets they
could see the great viscous mass lifting over the rooftops, flowing through the
gutted buildings which in turn helped to rigidify them.
Here and there the perimeter of the dyke moored itself to a heavier
obstruction-a church or government office-and diverged from its circular path
around the lagoon. One of these evaginations followed the route they had
taken on their way to the diving party, and Kerans felt his step quicken as they
approached the planetarium. He waited impatiently as the others idled in front
138
of the empty display windows of the old department stores, or gazed at the
black slime oozing down the escalators below the office blocks into sluggish
pools across the street.
Even the smallest of the buildings had been barricaded before being
abandoned, and a makeshift clutter of steel screens and grilles collapsed
across the doorways, hiding whatever might lie behind them. Everything was
covered with a fine coating of silt, smothering whatever grace and character
had once distinguished the streets, so that the entire city seemed to Kerans to
have been resurrected from its own sewers. Were the Day of Judgement to
come, the armies of the dead would probably rise clothed in the same filthy
mantle.
"Robert." Bodkin held his arm, pointing down the darkened street ahead of
them. Fifty yards away, its metal dome outlined faintly in the fragmentary light
of the distant signal rockets, stood the somber, shadow-draped hull of the
planetarium. Kerans stopped, recognising the orientation of the surrounding
roadway, the sidewalks and street lamps, then walked forward, half uncertain,
half curious, towards this pantheon which held so many of his terrors and
enigmas.
Sponges and red kelp sagged limply across the sidewalk outside the
entrance as they approached, picking their way carefully over the banks of
mud that lined the street. The groves of wraith-like fucus which had wreathed
the dome now flopped limply over the portico, their long draining fronds
hanging over the entrance like a ragged awning. Kerans reached up and
pushed aside the fronds, then peered cautiously into the interior of the
darkened foyer. Thick black mud, hissing faintly as its contained marine life
expired in a slow deflation of air-bladders and buoyancy sacs, lay everywhere,
over the ticket booths and the stairway to the mezzanine, across the walls and
door-panels. No longer the velvet mantle he remembered from his descent, it
was now a fragmenting cloak of rotting organic forms, like the vestments of
139
the grave. The once translucent threshold of the womb had vanished, its place
taken by the gateway to a sewer.
Kerans began to walk forwards across the foyer, remembering the deep
twilight bower of the auditorium and its strange zodiac. Then he felt the dark
fluid tilling out across the mud between his feet, like the leaking blood-stream
of a whale.
Quickly he took Beatrice's arm, and retraced their steps down the street.
"I'm afraid the magic has gone," he remarked flatly. He forced a laugh. "I
suppose Strangman would say that the suicide should never return to the
scene of his crime."
Attempting to take a shorter route, they blundered into a winding cul de
sac, managed to step back in time as a small caiman lunged at them from a
shallow pool. Darting between the rusting shells of cars, they regained the
open street, the alligator racing behind them. It paused by a lamp post on the
edge of the sidewalk, tail whipping slowly, jaws flexing, and Kerans pulled
Beatrice after him. They broke into a run and had covered ten yards when
Bodkin slipped and fell heavily into a bank of silt.
"Alan! Hurry!" Kerans started to go back for him, the caiman's head
pivoting towards them. Marooned behind in the lagoon, it seemed bewildered
and ready to attack anything.
Suddenly there was a roar of gunfire, the flames stabbing across the
roadway. Flares held above their heads, a group of men appeared around a
corner. In front of them was the white-faced figure of Strangman, followed
by the Admiral and Big Caesar, shotguns at their shoulders.
Strangman's eyes glittered in the flare light. He made a small bow towards
Beatrice, then saluted Kerans. Its spine shattered, the alligator thrashed
impotently in the gutter, revealing its yellow underbelly, and Big Caesar drew
140
his machete and began to hack at its head.
Strangman watched it with evil pleasure. "Loathsome brute," he
commented, then pulled from his pocket a huge rhinestone necklace, still
encrusted with algae, and held it out to Beatrice.
"For you, my dear." Deftly, he strung the strands around her neck,
regarding the effect with pleasure. The entwined weeds among the sparkling
stones against the white skin of her breast made her look like some naiad of
the deep. "And all the other jewels of this dead sea."
With a flourish he was off again, the flares vanishing in the darkness with
the shouts of his men, leaving them alone in the silence with the white jewels
and the decapitated alligator.
During the next days events proceeded to even greater madness.
Increasingly disorientated, Kerans would wander alone through the dark
streets at night-by day it became unbearably hot in the labyrinth of alleywaysunable
to tear himself away from his memories of the old lagoon, yet at the
same time locked fast to the empty streets and gutted buildings.
After his first surprise at seeing the drained lagoon he began to sink rapidly
into a state of dulled inertia, from which he tried helplessly to rouse himself.
Dimly he realised that the lagoon had represented a complex of neuronic
needs that were impossible to satisfy by any other means. This blunting
lethargy deepened, unbroken by the violence around him, and more and more
he felt like a man marooned in a time sea, hemmed in by a mass of dissonant
realities millions of years apart.
The great sun beating in his mind almost drowned out the sounds of the
looting and revelry, the roars of explosives and shotguns. Like a blind man he
stumbled in and out of the old arcades and entrances, his white dinner Suit
stained and grimy, jeered at by the sailors as they charged by him, playfully
141
buffeting his shoulders. At midnight he would wander through the roistering
singers in the square and sit beside Strangman at his parties, hiding back
under the shadow of the paddle-ship, watching the dancing and listening to
the beat of the drums and guitars, overlayed in his mind by the insistent
pounding of the black sun.
He abandoned any attempt to return to the hotel-the creek was blocked by
the two pumping scows and the intervening lagoon seethed with alligatorsand
during the day either slept in Beatrice's apartment on the sofa or sat
numbly in a quiet alcove on the gaming deck 0f the depot ship. Most of the
crew would be asleep among the crates or arguing over their spoils, waiting
with surly impatience for the dusk, and they left him alone. By an inversion of
logic it was safer to stay close to Strangman than to try to continue his
previous separate regimen. Bodkin attempted this, withdrawing in a growing
state of shock to the testing station-now reached by a precipitous climb up a
dilapidated fire escape-but on one of his midnight forays out into the streets
of the university quarter behind the planetarium he had been seized by a
group of sailors and roughly manhandled. By attaching himself to Strangman's
entourage Kerans had at last conceded his absolute authority over the
lagoons.
Once he managed to force himself to visit Bodkin, found him resting
quietly in his bunk, cooled by a homemade fan and the fading air-conditioner.
Like himself, Bodkin seemed to be isolated on a small spur of reality in the
centre of the time sea.
"Robert," he murmured through his swollen lips, "get away from here.
Take her, the girl-" here he searched for the name "-Beatrice, and find
another lagoon."
Kerans nodded, hunching himself inside the narrow cone of cool air
projected by the air-conditioner. "I know, Alan, Strangman's insane and
142
dangerous, but for some reason I can't leave yet. I don't know why, but
there's something here-those naked streets." He gave up cloudily. "What is it?
There's a strange incubus on my mind, I must lift it first."
Bodkin managed to sit up weakly. "Kerans, listen. Take her and go.
Tonight. Time doesn't exist here now."
In the laboratory below a pallid brown scum was draped over the great
semi-circle of progress charts, Bodkin's dismembered neuronic zodiac, and
veiled the stranded benches and fume cupboards. Kerans made a half-hearted
attempt to replace the charts that had fallen to the floor, then gave up and
spent the next hour washing his silk dinner jacket in a pool of water left
behind in one of the sinks.
Perhaps in imitation of himself, several of the crew now also sported
tuxedos and black ties. A pantechnicon full of evening wear sealed inside
water-tight envelopes had been found in one of the warehouses. Egged on by
Strangman, half a dozen of the sailors dressed themselves up, bow ties around
their bare necks, and pranced through the streets in tremendous glee, tails
flaring and knees high-kicking, like a troupe of lunatic waiters at a dervish
carnival.
After the initial abandon, the looting began to take on a more serious note.
Whatever his private reasons, Strangman was solely interested in objets d'art,
and after a careful reconnaissance identified one of the city's principal
museums. But, to his annoyance, the building had been stripped, and his only
salvage was a large mosaic which his men removed tile by tile from the
entrance hail and laid out like a vast jig-saw on the observation deck of the
depot ship.
This disappointment prompted Kerans to warn Bodkin that Strangman
might try to vent his spleen on him, but when he climbed up to the testing
station early the next evening he found that Bodkin had gone. The air-
143
conditioner had exhausted its fuel, and Bodkin, deliberately it seemed, had
opened the windows before he left, so that the entire station steamed like a
cauldron.
Curiously, Bodkin's disappearance gave Kerans little concern. Immersed in
himself, he merely assumed that the biologist had followed his own advice
and moved out to one of the lagoons to the south.
Beatrice, however, was still there. Like Kerans, she had sunk into a private
reverie. Kerans rarely saw her during the day, when she would be locked into
her bedroom, but at midnight, when it became cool, she would always come
down from her penthouse among the stars and join Strangman at his parties.
She sat numbly beside him in her blue evening dress, her hair studded with
three or four of the tiaras Strangman had looted from the old jewellery vaults,
her breasts smothered under a mass of glittering chains and crescents, like a
mad queen in a horror drama.
Strangman treated her with a strange deference, not unmarked by a polite
hostility, almost as if she were a tribal totem, a deity whose power was
responsible for their continued good fortune but nonetheless resented.
Kerans tried to stay near her, within her orbit of protection, and the evening
after Bodkin's disappearance leaned across the cushions to say: "Alan's gone.
Old Bodkin. Did he see you before he left?"
But Beatrice stared out over the fires burning in the square, without
looking at him said in a vague voice: "Listen to the drumming, Robert. How
many suns are there, do you think?"
Wilder now than Kerans had ever seen him, Strangman danced about the
camp fires, sometimes forcing Kerans to join him, inciting the bongo
drummers to ever faster rhythms. Then, exhausted, he would slump back on
his divan, his thin white face like blue chalk.
144
Leaning on one elbow, he stared somberly at Kerans, squatting on a
cushion behind him.
"Do you know why they fear me, Kerans? The Admiral, Big Caesar and the
others. Let me tell you my secret." Then, in a whisper: "Because they think
I'm dead."
In a spasm of laughter, he rocked back into the divan, shaking helplessly.
"Oh, my God, Kerans! What's the matter with you two. Come out of that
trance." He looked up as Big Caesar approached, doffing the dried alligator's
head which he wore like a hood over his own. "Yes, what is it? A special song
for Doctor Kerans? Capital! Did you hear that, Doctor? Let's go then, with
The Ballad of Mistah Bones!"
Clearing his throat, with much prancing and gesticulation, the big negro
began, his voice deep and guttural.
Mistah Bones, he loves dried men,
Got himself a banana girl; three prophets sly,
She played him all crazy, drowned him in the snake wine,
Never heard so many swamp birds,
That old boss alligator.
Rum Bones, he went skull fishing,
Down off Angel Creek, where the dried men run,
Took out his turtle stone, waited for the chapel boat,
145
Three prophets landing,
Some bad joss.
Rum Bones, he saw the loving girl,
Gave his turtle stone for two bananas,
He had that banana girl like a hot mangrove;
Prophets saw him,
No dried men coming for Rum Bones.
Rum Bones, he danced for that loving girl,
Built a banana house for her loving bed-"
With a sudden shout, Strangman leapt from the divan, raced past Big
Caesar into the centre of the square, pointing up at the perimeter wall of the
lagoon high above them. Outlined against the setting sky was the small square
figure of Dr. Bodkin, picking his way slowly across the wooden barrage that
held back the creek waters outside. Unaware that he had been spotted by the
party below, he carried a small wooden box in one hand, a faint light fizzing
from a trailing wire.
Wide awake, Strangman bellowed: "Admiral, Big Caesar! Get him, he's got
a bomb!"
In a wild scramble the party dissolved, with the exception of Beatrice and
Kerans everyone raced off across the square. Shotguns slammed left and
right, and Bodkin paused uncertainly, the fuse wire sparking about his legs.
Then he turned and began to edge back along the barrage.
146
Kerans jumped to his feet and ran after the others. As he reached the
perimeter wall star-shells were bursting into the air, spitting magnesium
fragments across the roadway. Strangman and the Admiral were leaping up a
fire escape, Big Caesar's shotgun slamming out over their heads. Bodkin had
left the bomb in the centre of the dam and was racing away over the rooftops.
Straddling the final ledge, Strangman leapt up on to the barrage, in a dozen
strides reached the bomb and kicked it out into the centre of the creek. As the
splash died away a cheer of approval went up from those below. Catching his
breath, Strangman buttoned his jacket, then slipped a short-barreled.38 from
his shoulder holster. A thin smile glittered on his face. Whipping on the cries
of his followers, he set out after Bodkin as he scaled his way painfully up the
pontoon of the testing station.
Kerans listened numbly to the final shots, remembering Bodkin's warning
and the necessity, for which he bore him no grudge as he had chosen to
ignore it, of being swept away himself with Strangman and his crew. He
walked slowly back to the square, where Beatrice still sat on the heap of
cushions, the alligator head on the ground in front of her. As he reached her
he heard the footsteps behind him slowing menacingly, a strange silence fall
over the pack.
He swung around to see Strangman saunter forward, a smirk twisting his
lips. Big Caesar and the Admiral were at his shoulder, their shotguns
exchanged for machetes. The rest of the crew fanned out in a loose semicircle,
watching expectantly, obviously pleased to see Kerans, the aloof
medicine-man of a rival juju, get his just deserts.
"That was rather stupid of Bodkin, don't you think, Doctor? Dangerous
too, as a matter of fact. We could damn nearly have all been drowned."
Strangman paused a few feet from Kerans, eyeing him moodily. "You knew
Bodkin pretty well, I'm surprised you didn't anticipate that. I don't know
147
whether I should take any more chances with mad biologists."
He was about to gesture to Big Caesar when Beatrice jumped to her feet
and rushed over to Strangman.
"Strangman! For heaven's sake, one's enough. Stop it, we won't hurt you!
Look, you can have all these!"
With a wrench she unclasped the mass of necklaces, tore the tiaras from
her hair and flung them at Strangman. Snarling with anger, Strangman kicked
them into the gutter, and Big Caesar stepped past her, the machete swinging
upward.
"Strangman!" Beatrice threw herself at Strangman, stumbled and almost
dragged him to the ground by his lapels. "You white devil, can't you leave us
alone?"
Strangman twisted her away, breath seething through his clenched teeth.
He gazed wildly at the disheveled woman down on her knees among the
jewels, and was about to wave Big Caesar on when a sudden intention tremor
flickered across his right cheek. He slapped at it with his open hand, trying to
brush it away like a fly, then flexed his facial muscles in an ugly grimace,
unable to master the spasm. For a moment his face was twisted in a grotesque
gape, like a man struggling in lock-jaw. Aware of his master's indecision, Big
Caesar hesitated, and Kerans moved backwards into the shadows under the
depot ship.
"All right! God, what a…!" Strangman muttered something thickly to
himself and straightened his jacket, the point grudgingly conceded. The tic
had faded. He nodded slowly at Beatrice, as if warning her that any future
intercessions would be ignored, then barked sharply at Big Caesar. The
machetes were tossed aside, but before Beatrice could protest again the entire
pack threw itself on Kerans with a series of whoops and yells, hands flailing
148
and clapping.
Kerans tried to sidestep them, uncertain from the circle of grinning faces
whether this was merely some elaborate form of horseplay intended to
discharge the tension that Bodkin's murder had generated, and at the same
time administer a salutary reproof. He skipped around Strangman's divan as
the pack closed in, found his escape blocked by the Admiral, who was feinting
from side to side in his white tennis shoes like a dancer. Suddenly he sprang
forwards and kicked Kerans' feet from under him. Kerans sat down heavily
on the divan, and a dozen, oily brown-skinned arms seized him around the
neck and shoulders and somersaulted him backwards onto the cobbled
ground. He struggled helplessly to free himself, had a glimpse through the
panting bodies of Strangman and Beatrice watching from the distance. Taking
her arm, Strangman drew her firmly towards the gangway.
Then a large silk cushion was stuffed into Kerans' face, and hard palms
began to pound a drum-beat across the back of his neck.
149
12 - The Feast of Skulls
"The Feast of Skulls!"
Goblet raised in the flare-light, its amber contents spilling over his suit,
Strangman let out an exultant shout, with a flourish leapt down from the
fountain as the tumbrel cart swerved across the cobbled square. Propelled by
six sweating, bare-chested sailors bent double between its shafts, it rattled and
jolted through the quickening embers of the charcoal fires, a dozen hands
helping it on its way, and to a final accelerating crescendo on the drums struck
the edge of the dais and tipped its white gleaming cargo across the boards at
Kerans' feet. Immediately a chanting circle formed around him, hands beat
out an excited rantando, white teeth flashed and snapped at the air like
demoniac dice, hips swiveled and heels stamped. The Admiral dived forward
and cleared a way through the whirling torsos, and Big Caesar, a steel trident
held in front of him with a huge bale of red kelp and fucus transfixed on its
barbs, lurched onto the dais and with a grunting heave tossed the dripping
fronds into the air over the throne.
Kerans swayed forward helplessly as the sweet, acrid weeds cascaded
around his head and shoulders, the lights of the dancing flares reflected in the
gilt arm-rests of the throne. As the rhythm of the drums beat around him,
almost exorcising the deeper pulse booming faintly in the base of his mind, he
let his weight hang against the bloodied thongs around his wrists, indifferent
to the pain as he sank in and out of consciousness. At his feet, at the base of
the throne, the broken white harvest of bones gleamed with their ivory
whiteness: slender tibias and femurs, scapulas like worn trowels, a mesh of
ribs and vertebrae, even two lolling skulls. The light flickered across their bald
pates and winked in the empty eye sockets, leaping from the bowls of
kerosene borne by the corridor of statues which led towards the throne across
the square. The dancers had formed themselves into a long undulating line,
and with Strangman prancing at their head began to weave in and out of the
150
marble nymphs, the drummers around the fires pivoting in their seats to
follow their progress.
Given a momentary respite as they circled the square, Kerans lolled against
the velvet back-rest, pulling automatically at his clamped wrists. The kelp
trailed around his neck and shoulders, falling over his eyes from the tin crown
Strangman had clamped to his brow. Almost dry, the kelp exuded its sweaty
stench, and covered his arms so that only a few ragged strips of his dinner
jacket were visible. At the edge of the dais, beyond the litter of bones and rum
bottles, were more drifts of the weed, and a debris of conches and
dismembered star-fish with which they had pelted him before finding the
mausoleum.
Twenty feet behind him towered the dark bulk of the depot ship, a few
lights still burning on its decks. For two nights the parties had continued, the
tempo mounting hour by hour, Strangman apparently determined to exhaust
his crew. Kerans drifted helplessly in a half-conscious reverie, his pain dulled
by the rum forced down his throat (evidently the final indignity, drowning
Neptune in an even more magical and potent sea), mild concussion cloaking
the scene before him in a mist of blood and scotomata. Dimly he was aware
of his torn wrists and lacerated body, but he sat patiently, stoically acting out
the role of Neptune into which he had been cast, accepting the refuse and
abuse heaped upon him as the crew discharged their fear and hatred of the
sea. In that role, too, or its caricature which he performed, lay his only safety.
Whatever hi motives, Strangman still seemed reluctant to kill him, and the
crew reflected this hesitation, always disguising their insults and tortures res in
the form of grotesque and hilarious jokes, protecting themselves when they
pelted him with sea-weed by half-pretending to make an offering to an idol.
The snake of dancers reappeared and formed itself into a chanting circle
around him. Strangman detached himself from its centre-he was obviously
reluctant to come too close to Kerans, perhaps afraid that the bleeding wrists
151
and forehead would make him realise the crudity of the jape-and Big Caesar
came forward, his huge knobbed face like an inflamed hippo's. Lumbering
about to the rhythm of the bongos, he selected a skull and femur from the
pile of bones around the throne, began to beat out a tattoo for Kerans,
tapping the varying thicknesses of the temporal and occipital lobes to pick out
a crude cranial octave. Several others joined in, and with a rattle of femur and
tibia, radius and ulna, a mad dance of the bones ensued. Weakly, only half
aware of the grinning, insulting faces pressed to within a foot or two of his
own, Kerans waited for this to subside, then leaned back and tried to shield
his eyes as a salvo of star-shells burst overhead and for a moment illuminated
the depot ship and the surrounding buildings. This signaled the end of the
festivity and the start of another night's work. With a shout, Strangman and
the Admiral pulled apart the dancing group. The cart was hauled away, metal
rims ringing over the cobbles, and the kerosene flares were extinguished.
Within a minute the square was dark and empty, a few gutted fires sputtering
among the cushions and drums, intermittently reflected in the gilt limbs of the
throne and the white bones encircling it.
Now and then, at intervals through the night, a small group of looters
would reappear, wheeling their booty in front of them, a bronze statue or a
section of portico, hoist them into the ship and then vanish again, ignoring
the motionless figure hunched on the throne among the shadows. By now
Kerans was asleep, unaware of his fatigue and hunger, waking for a few
minutes before dawn at the coolest ebb of the night to shout for Beatrice. He
had not seen her since his capture after Bodkin's death, and assumed that
Strangman had locked her away within the depot ship.
At last, after the exploding night with its bravura of drums and star-shells,
the dawn lifted over the shadow-filled square, drawing behind it the immense
golden canopy of the sun. Within an hour the square and the drained streets
around it were silent, only & distant whir of an air-conditioner in the depot
ship reminding Kerans that he was not alone. Somehow, by a manifest
152
miracle, had survived the previous day, sitting out unprotected in the full
noon heat, shaded by only the cloak of weeds trailing from his crown. Like a
stranded Neptune, he looked out from this make shift pavilion of sea weed at
the carpet of brilliant light covering the bones and garbage. Once he had been
aware of a hatchway opening onto a deck above, and sensed that Strangman
had come from his cabin to observe him-a few minutes later several buckets
of icy water were tossed down onto him. He sipped feverishly the cold drops
falling from the weeds into his mouth like frozen pearls. Immediately
afterwards he sank off into a profound torpor, waking after dusk just before
the night's festivities were to begin.
Then Strangman had come down in his pressed white suit and examined
him critically, in a strange access of pity suddenly murmured: "Kerans, you're
still alive, how do you do it?"
It was this remark which sustained him through the second day, when the
white carpet at noon lay over the square in incandescent layers a few inches
apart, like the planes of parallel universes crystallised Out of the continuum
by the immense heat. Across his skin the air burned like a flame. He stared
listlessly at the marble statues, and thought of Hardman, moving through the
pillars of light on his way towards the mouth of the sun, disappearing over the
dunes of luminous ash. The same power which saved Hardman seemed to
have revealed itself within Kerans, in some way adjusting his metabolism so
that he could survive the unbroken heat. Still he was watched from the deck
above. Once a large salamander three feet long had darted among the bones
towards him, its insane teeth like flints of obsidian flexing slowly as it scented
Kerans, and a single shot had roared out from the deck, smashing the lizard
into a writhing bloodied mess at his feet.
Like the reptiles which sat motionlessly in the sunlight, he waited patiently
for the day to end.
153
Again Strangman seemed baffled to find him, swaying in an exhausted
delirium but still alive. A flicker of nervousness creased his mouth, and he
glanced irritably at Big Caesar and the crew waiting around the dais in the
torchlight, apparently as surprised as himself. When Strangman began to
whoop and shout for drums the response was markedly less prompt.
Determined to break Kerans' power for once and for all, Strangman
ordered two additional casks of rum lowered from the depot ship, hoping to
drive from his men's minds their unconscious fear of Kerans and the paternal
guardian of the sea he now symbolised. Soon the square was filled with noisy
stumbling figures, tipping their jugs and bottles to their lips, tap dancing on
the drum skins. Accompanied by the Admiral, Strangman moved swiftly from
one Party to another, inciting them to further acts of extravagance. Big Caesar
donned the alligator head and tottered about the square on his knees, a
whooping troupe of drummers behind him.
Wearily Kerans waited for the climax. At Strangman's instructions the
throne was lifted from the dais and lashed to the cart Kerans lay back limply
against the head-rest, looking up at the dark flanks of the buildings as Big
Caesar heaped the bones and sea-weed around his feet. With a shout from
Strangman the drunken procession set off, a dozen men fighting to get
between the shafts of the tumbrel, throwing it from left to right across the
square and knocking down two of the statues. Amid a chorus of excited
orders from Strangman and the Admiral, who raced along beside the wheels,
trying helplessly to restrain it, the cart rapidly gathered speed and veered away
into a side-street, careened along the pavement before demolishing a rusty
lamp-standard. Bludgeoning the curly pates of the men around him with his
massive fists, Big Caesar fought his way to the front of the shafts, seized one
in each hand and enforced a more leisurely progress.
High above their heads, Kerans sat in the rocking throne, the cool air
slowly reviving him. He watched the ceremony below with semi-conscious
154
detachment, aware that they were moving systematically down every street in
the drained lagoon, almost as if he were an abducted Neptune forced against
his will to sanctify those sections of the drowned city which had been stolen
from him by Strangman and reclaimed.
But gradually, as the exertion of pulling the cart cleared their heads and
made them move in step, the men between the shafts began to sing what
sounded like the lay of an old Haitian cargo cult, a deep crooning melody that
again underlined their ambivalent attitude towards Kerans. In an effort to reestablish
the real purpose of the outing, Strangman began to shout and
brandish his flare pistol, after a short scrimmage made them reverse the
direction of the cart so that they pushed it instead of pulled. As they passed
the planetarium Big Caesar leapt up on to the cart, clinging to the throne like
an immense ape, picked up the alligator's head and clamped it down over
Kerans' shoulders.
Blinded and almost suffocated by the foetid stench of the crudely skinned
hide, Kerans felt himself flung helplessly from side to side as the tumbrel
gained speed again. The men between the shafts, unaware of their direction,
raced along the street, panting after Strangman and the Admiral, Big Caesar
pursuing them with a rain of blows and kicks. Almost out of control, the cart
swerved and lurched, narrowly missed wrecking itself on a traffic island, then
straightened up and accelerated down an open stretch of roadway. As they
neared a corner Strangman suddenly shouted to Big Caesar, without looking
the huge mulatto flung his weight on the righthand shaft and the cart pivoted
and bounded up on to the sidewalk For fifty yards it raced along helplessly,
several of the men tripping over each other's legs and falling to the ground,
then in a scream of axle iron and timber collided with the wall and pitched
onto its side.
Torn from its mooring, the throne was flung half-way across the street into
a low mud bank. Kerans lay face downwards, his impact with the ground
155
softened by the damp silt, freed of the alligator head but still trapped in his
seat. Two or three of the crew were spreadeagled around him and picked
themselves up, and an upended wheel of the cart rumbled slowly in the air.
Staggering helplessly with laughter, Strangman slapped Big Caesar and the
Admiral on the back, soon had the rest of the crew jabbering excitedly to each
other. They gathered around the wrecked cart, then went over to look at the
upturned throne. Strangman rested one foot upon it majestically, rocking the
shattered headrest. Holding the pose long enough to convince his followers
that Kerans' power was now truly spent, he bolstered his flare pistol and ran
away down the street, beckoning the others after him. With a chorus of jeers
and shouts, the pack made off.
Pinioned below the inverted throne, Kerans stirred painfully. His head and
right shoulder were half buried in the bank of caking silt. He flexed his wrists
against the loosened thongs, but they were still too tight for him to free his
hands.
Shifting his weight on to his shoulders, he tried to pull the throne over by
his arms, then noticed that the left-hand arm-rest had snapped from its
vertical support. Slowly he pressed his blunted fingers under the arm-rest and
began to work the thongs loop by loop over the ragged stump of the support
protruding from the mortise joint.
When his hand freed itself, he let it fall limply to the ground, then
massaged his bruised lips and cheeks, and kneaded the stiffened muscles of
his chest and stomach. He twisted himself onto his side and picked at the
knot clamping his right wrist to the other rest, in the brief flares of light from
the star-shells loosened the thongs and freed himself.
For five minutes he lay inertly under the dark hulk of the throne, listening
to the distant voices recede into the alleys beyond the depot ship. Gradually
the flares faded, and the street became a silent canyon, the rooftops faintly
156
illuminated by the fading phosphorescent glow of the dying animalcula, which
cast a web-like silver veil over the drained buildings and turned them into the
expiring corner of an ancient spectral city.
Crawling from below the throne, he rose uncertainly to his feet, stumbled
across the sidewalk and leaned against the wall, his head pounding from the
exertion. He pressed his face against the cool still-damp stone, staring down
the street into which Strangman and his men had disappeared.
Abruptly, before his eyes closed involuntarily, he saw two figures
approaching, one familiarly white-suited, the other tall and bowshouldered,
walking swiftly down the street towards him.
"Strangman…!" Kerans whispered. His fingers gripped the loose mortar,
and he stiffened into the shadows which covered the wall. The two men were
a hundred yards away, but he could see Strangman's brisk, purposive stride,
Big Caesar's loping step behind him. Something gleamed as it caught a ray of
light shining down an intersection, a stab of silver that swung from Big
Caesar's hand.
Searching the darkness, Kerans edged along the wall, almost cut his hands
on a ragged angle of plate glass in a store window. A few yards away was the
entrance to a large arcade, running through the block until it joined a parallel
street fifty yards to the west. Black silt a foot deep covered its floor, and
Kerans crouched down as he climbed the shallow steps, then ran slowly
through the dark tunnel to the far end of the arcade, the soft silt muffling his
limping footsteps.
He waited behind a pillar at the rear entrance, steadying himself as
Strangman and Big Caesar reached the throne. The machete in the mulatto's
giant hand seemed little more than a razor. Strang man raised one hand
warningly before touching the throne. Carefully he scanned the streets and
walls of windows, his lean white jaw illuminated in the moonlight. Then he
157
gestured sharply at Big Caesar and kicked the throne over with his foot.
As their oaths rang out into the air, Kerans drew himself back behind the
pillar, then tiptoed quickly across the street towards a narrow alleyway that ran
off into the labyrinthine nexus of the university quarter.
Half an hour later he took up his position on the top floor of a fifteenstorey
office block that formed part of the perimeter wall of the lagoon. A
narrow balcony ringed the suite of offices, at its rear leading to a fire escape
that trailed off across the lower roofs into the jungle beyond, finally
swallowed by the giant retaining banks of silt. Thin pools of water which had
condensed from the afternoon heat mists lay across the plastic floors, and
after climbing the central stairwell Kerans lay down and bathed his face and
mouth in the cool liquid, slowly soothing his wounded wrists.
No search party came after him. Rather than concede complete defeat-the
only interpretation most of the crew would put upon Kerans' disappearance,
Strangman had evidently decided to accept his escape as a fait accompli and
forget him, assuming that Kerans would set sail for the lagoons in the south.
Through the night the looting parties continued to rove the streets, each
succeeding find signallised by a display of rockets and pyrotechnics.
Kerans rested until dawn, lying in a pool of water, letting it soak through
the ragged strips of the silk dinner jacket that still clung to him, washing away
the stench of the sea-weed and silt. An hour before dawn he pulled himself to
his feet, tore off his jacket and shirt and stuffed them down a crack in the
wall. He unscrewed a glass light bracket that was intact, carefully scooped up
the water from one of the clean pools on the floor below. He had collected
about a quart by the time the sun was lifting over the eastern perimeter of the
lagoon. Two corridors down he trapped a small lizard in the washroom, killed
it with a loose brick. He lit a fire of tinder with a lens of chipped glass, roasted
the filets of dark stringy meat until they were tender. The small steaks melted
158
in his cracked mouth with the exquisite tenderness of warm fat. Recovering
his strength, he climbed back to the top floor and retired to a service cubicle
behind the elevator shaft. After wedging the door with a few lengths of rusty
banister rail, he settled down in the corner and waited for the evening.
The last sunlight was fading over the water as Kerans paddled the raft
below the fronds of the fern trees dipping into the water around the lagoon,
the blood and copper bronzes of the afternoon sun giving way to deep violets
and indigo. Overhead the sky was an immense funnel of sapphire and purple,
fantasticated whorls of coral cloud marking the descent of the sun like
baroque vapour trails. A slack oily swell disturbed the surface of the lagoon,
the water clinging to the leaves of the ferns like translucent wax. A hundred
yards away it slapped lazily against the shattered remains of the jetty below the
Ritz, throwing up a few broken spars of timber. Still restrained by the loose
net of mooring lines, the fifty-gallon drums floated together like a group of
hump-backed alligators. Luckily the alligators Strangman had posted around
the lagoon were still in their nests among the buildings, or had dispersed into
the neighbouring creeks in search of food as the iguanas retreated before
them.
Kerans paused before paddling out across the exposed face of the derelict
bank adjacent to the Ritz, scanning the shoreline and the exit creek for any of
Strangman's sentries. The concentration needed to build the raft from two
galvanised iron water tanks had almost drained his brain, and he waited
carefully before pushing on. As he neared the jetty he saw that the mooring
lines had been slashed deliberately, the wooden box frame crushed by some
heavy water-craft, probably the hydroplane, which Strangman had berthed in
the central lagoon.
Wedging the raft between two of the floating drums, where it floated
unobtrusively among the shifting debris, Kerans pulled himself up on to the
balcony and stepped over the window ledge into the hotel. Quickly he made
159
his way up the staircase, following the trail of huge blurred footprints on the
blue carpet mould which led down from the roof.
The penthouse had been wrecked. As he opened the outer wooden door
into the suite a ragged glass panel of the interior air-seal fell to the floor at his
feet. Someone had moved through the rooms in a berserk frenzy of violence,
systematically smashing everything within sight. The Louis Quinze furniture
had been hacked to pieces, dismembered legs and arms hurled through the
internal glass walls. The carpeting over the floor lay in a tangle of long torn
strips, even the cord underlay ripped apart so that the floor seals could be
hacked and breached. Its legs lopped, the cabinet of the desk lay in two
divided sections, the crocodile skin pared from its edges. Books were
scattered underfoot, many of them slashed cleanly into two. A rain of blows
had fallen upon the mantelpiece, huge gouges cut into its gilt lip, and
enormous stars of frosted glass and silverscreen burst across the mirror like
frozen explosions.
Stepping over the litter, Kerans ventured briefly onto the terrace, where the
wire mesh of the mosquito screen had been ballooned outwards until it burst.
The beach chairs where he had lain for so many months were chopped to
matchwood.
As he expected, the decoy safe behind the desk had been sprung, its door
open on the empty vault. Kerans went into the bedroom, a faint smile
crossing his face when he realised that Strangman's housebreakers had failed
to find the deep safe behind the bedroom mirror over the escritoire. The
dented cylinder of the brass compass he had idly stolen from the base, still
pointing to its talismanic south, lay on the floor below the small circular
mirror, which it had shattered into a pattern like a magnified snow-flake.
Kerans carefully rotated the rococo frame, released the hinge and drew it back
to reveal the unbreached dial of the safe.
160
Darkness fell from the air, throwing long shadows into the suite as Kerans'
fingers raced through the tumblers. With a relieved intake of breath he pulled
back the door, quickly slipped out the heavy Colt.45 and its carton of slugs.
He sat down on the wrecked bed and tore the seals off the carton, then
loaded the chamber, weighing the massive black weapon in his hand. He
emptied the carton and filled his pockets with the slugs, then tightened his
belt and went back into the lounge.
As he surveyed the room, he realised that by a curious paradox he bore
Strangman little malice for wrecking the suite. In a sense its destruction, and
with it all his memories of the lagoon, merely underlined something he had
been tacitly ignoring for some time, and which Strangman's arrival, and all it
implied, should have made him accept-the need to abandon the lagoon and
move southwards. His time there had outlived itself, and the air-sealed suite
with its constant temperature and humidity, its supplies of fuel and food, were
nothing more than an encapsulated form of his previous environment, to
which he had clung like a reluctant embryo to its yoke sac. The shattering of
this shell, like the piercing doubts about his true unconscious motives set off
by his near drowning in the planetarium, was the necessary spur to action, to
his emergence into the brighter day of the interior, archaeopsychic sun. Now
he would have to go forward. Both the past, represented by Riggs, and the
present contained within the demolished penthouse, no longer offered a
viable existence. His commitment to the future, so far one of choice and
plagued by so many doubts and hesitations, was now absolute.
In the darkness the sleek curved hull of the depot ship rose into the air like
the velvet belly of a stranded whale. Kerans crouched down in the shadow of
the stern paddle, his lean bronzed body merging him into the background. He
hid in the narrow interval between two of the blades, each a riveted metal slab
fifteen feet wide and four feet deep, peering through the coconut-sized links
of the drive chain. It was shortly before midnight, and the last of the foraging
parties was leaving the gangway, the sailors, bottle in one hand and machete
161
in the other, lurching off across the square. The cobbles were littered with
burst cushions and bongo drums, bones and burnt-out embers, all kicked
about in a careless melee.
Kerans waited until the last of the group made their way off among the
streets, then stood up and secured the Colt in his belt. Far away, on the
opposite side of the lagoon, was Beatrice's apartment, its windows in
darkness, the light on the pylon extinguished. Kerans had considered climbing
the stairs to the top floor, but safely assumed that Beatrice would be aboard
the depot ship, an unwilling house-guest of Strangman.
Overhead a figure appeared at the rail, then withdrew. Distantly a voice
shouted something, another replied from the bridge. A hatchway from the
galley opened and a pail-full of filthy slops were tossed down into the square.
Already a substantial pool of abyssal fluid had gathered under the ship, soon it
would fill the lagoon and the ship would float away again on a sea of its own
excrement.
Ducking under the band of the drive chain, Kerans stepped up onto the
lowest blade, quickly pulled himself hand over hand up this curved radial
ladder. The paddle creaked slightly, rotating a few inches under his weight as
the slack in the drive chain was taken in. At the top he transferred to the steel
boom which carried the paddle axle. Steadying himself on the overhead guyrope
controlling the blade scraper, he crawled slowly along the foot-wide
boom, then stood up and climbed over the passenger rail into the small well
of the flag-deck. A narrow companionway led up diagonally to the
observation deck. Kerans scaled it soundlessly, pausing as he passed the two
intervening decks in case any sailor with a hangover was moon-gazing at the
rail.
Hiding in the lee of a white-painted gig berthed on the deck, Kerans moved
forward, ducking from one ventilator to the next, reached a rusty winch
162
which stood a few feet from the dining table where Strangman had
entertained them. The table had been stripped, the divans and chesterfield
drawn up in a row below the giant painting still propped against the funnels.
Voices sounded below again, and the gangway creaked as a last departure
stepped down into the square. In the distance, over the rooftops, a signal flare
glowed briefly against the chimney stacks. As it faded Kerans stood up and
walked past the painting towards the hatchway hidden behind it.
Suddenly he stopped, hand reaching for the butt of the Colt. Little more
than fifteen feet away from him, on the berthing wing of the bridge, the red
end of a cheroot glowed in the darkness, apparently detached from any
corporeal form. Poised on the balls of his feet, and unable to either move
forward or withdraw, Kerans searched the darkness around the glow, then
picked out the white brim of the Admiral's peaked cap. A moment later, as he
inhaled contentedly on the cheroot, the gleam of his eyes reflected the
glowing tip.
While the men below crossed the square, the Admiral turned and surveyed
the observation deck. Over the edge of the wooden rail Kerans could see the
butt of a shotgun cradled loosely in his elbow. The cheroot swiveled to one
side of his mouth and a cone of white smoke dispersed in the air like silver
dust. For a full two or three seconds he looked straight at Kerans, silhouetted
in the darkness against the mass of figures on the canvas, but he gave no hint
of recognition, apparently assuming that Kerans was part of the composition.
Then he strolled slowly into the bridge-house.
Picking each footstep carefully, Kerans advanced to the edge of the
painting, then ducked into the shadows behind it. A fan of light from the
hatchway lay across the deck. Crouching down, the Colt steady in his hand, he
slowly descended the steps onto the empty gaming deck, watching the
doorways for any sign of movement, for a leveled gun barrel among the
163
curtains. Strangman's suite was directly below the bridge, entered by a panel
door in an alcove behind the bar.
He waited by the door until a metal tray slammed in the galley, then leaned
on the handle and eased the door off its latch, stepped silently into the
darkness. For a few seconds he paused inside the door, adjusting his eyes to
the dim light cast into the ante-room through a bead curtain hidden behind a
chart cabinet on his right. In the centre of the room was a large map table,
roll-maps under the glass top. His bare feet sank into the soft carpeting, and
he stepped past the cabinet and peered through the beads.
The room, twice the length, was Strangman's principal saloon, an oaklined
chamber with leather couches facing each other down the side walls, a large
antique globe on its bronze pedestal below the forward row of portholes.
Three chandeliers hung from the ceiling, but only one was lit, over a highbacked
Byzantine chair with stained glass inlays at the far end of the room,
shining on the jewels which spilled from the metal gunboxes drawn up on a
semi-circle of low tables.
Head back against the chair, one hand touching the slender stem of a goldlipped
glass on a mahogany table at her elbow, was Beatrice Dahl. Her blue
brocade dress was spread out like a peacock's tail, a few pearls and sapphires
which had spilled from her left hand gleaming among the folds like electric
eyes. Kerans hesitated, watching the door opposite which led into
Strangman's cabin, then parted the curtain slightly so that the beads tinkled
gently.
Beatrice ignored this, obviously too-familiar with the sound of rustling
glass. The chests at her feet were loaded with a mass of jeweled trashdiamante
anklets, gilt clasps, tiaras and chains of zircon, rhinestone necklaces
and pendants, huge earrings of cultured pearl, overflowing from one chest to
another and spilling onto the salvers placed on the floor like vessels to catch a
164
quicksilver rainfall.
For a moment Kerans thought that Beatrice had been drugged- her
expression was vacant and blank, like the mask of a wax dummy, her eyes on
some distant focus. Then her hand moved, and she raised the wine glass
perfunctorily to her lips.
"Beatrice!"
With a start she tipped the wine across her lap, looked up in surprise.
Pushing back the beads, Kerans stepped quickly across the room, caught her
elbow as she began to rise from the chair.
"Beatrice, wait! Don't move yet!" He tried the door behind the chair, found
it locked. "Strangman and his men are looting the streets, I think there's only
the Admiral up on the bridge."
Beatrice pressed her face to his shoulders, with her cool fingers traced the
black bruises showing through his ebony tan. "Robert, be careful! What
happened to you, Strangman wouldn't let me watch?" Her relief and pleasure
at seeing Kerans gave way to alarm. She glanced anxiously around the room.
"Darling, leave me here and get away. I don't think Strangman will harm me."
Kerans shook his head, then helped her to her feet. He gazed at Beatrice's
elegant profile, at her sleek carmine mouth and lacquered nails, almost
bemused by the heady scent of perfume and the brocaded rustle of her gown.
After the violence and filth of the past days he felt like one of the dustbegrimed
discoverers of the tomb of Nefertiti stumbling upon her exquisite
painted mask in the depths of the necropolis.
"Strangman's capable of anything, Beatrice. He's insane, they were playing a
sort of mad game with me, damn nearly killed me."
165
Beatrice gathered the train of her skirt, brushing away the jewels that clung
to its fabric. Despite the lavish assortment before her, her wrists and breast
were bare, one of her own small gold clasps in a contoured twist around her
neck. "But Robert, even if we get out-"
"Quiet!" Kerans stopped a few feet from the curtain, watching the strands
balloon faintly and then subside, trying to remember whether there was a
porthole open in the ante-room. "I've built a small raft, it should carry us far
enough. Later we'll rest and build a better one."
He started to walk towards the curtain when two of the strands parted
fractionally, something moved with snake-like speed and a whirling silver
blade three feet long cleft the air and spun towards his head like an immense
scythe. Wincing with pain, Kerans ducked and felt the blade skim past his
right shoulder, tearing a shallow three-inch weal, then impale itself with a
steely shudder in the oak paneling behind him. Voice frozen in her throat,
Beatrice backed wild-eyed into one of the occasional tables, knocking a chest
of jewels across the floor.
Before Kerans could reach her the curtain was thrashed back by an
enormous arm and a huge hunch-backed figure filled the doorway, his oneeyed
head lowered like a bull's below the transom. Sweat poured from his
huge muscled chest, staining his green shorts. In his right hand was a twelveinch
barb of gleaming steel, about to thrust upwards at Kerans' stomach.
Sidestepping down the room, Kerans steadied the revolver in his hands, the
huge negro's single cyclopean eye following him. Then he stepped on the
open teeth of a necklace clasp, involuntarily stumbled back against a sofa.
As he steadied himself against the wall Big Caesar launched himself
through the air at Kerans, the knife driving through the air in a short arc like
the tip of a propeller. Beatrice screamed, her voice abruptly drowned in the
tremendous roar of the Colt. Jolted by the recoil, Kerans sat down in the sofa,
166
watched the mulatto crash crookedly against the doorway, the knife spilling
from his hand. A strangled bubbling grunt erupted from his throat, and with a
cataclysmic wrench which summed up all his pain and frustration he tore at
the bead curtain and ripped it from the transom. The bunching muscles of his
torso contracted for the last time. Draped in the curtain, he fell forwards onto
the floor, his vast limbs like a bloated giant's, the thousands of beads spilling
around him.
"Beatrice! Come on!" Kerans seized her arm, steered her past the prostrate
body into the ante-room, his right hand and forearm numb from the jarring
discharge of the Colt. They crossed the alcove, and raced past the deserted
bar. Overhead a voice shouted from the bridge, and footsteps hurried across
the deck to the rail.
Kerans stopped, looking down at the voluminous folds of Beatrice's gown,
then abandoned his plan to retrace his entry over the stern paddle.
"We'll have to try the gangway." He pointed to the unguarded entrance by
the starboard rail, the beckoning night-club cupids with flutes to their ruby
lips dancing on either side of the steps. "It may look a little obvious, but it's
just about the only way left now."
Half-way down, the gangway began to rock in its davits, and they heard the
Admiral bark down at them from the bridge. A moment later the shotgun
roared out, the pellets slashing through the clapboard roof over their heads.
Kerans ducked, at the mouth of the gangway craned up at the bridge, now
directly overhead, saw the long barrel of the shotgun sticking into the air as
the Admiral maneuvered about.
Kerans jumped down into the square, took Beatrice by the waist and swung
her down. Together they crouched under the hull of the depot ship, then
darted across the square to the nearest street.
167
Half-way there Kerans looked over his shoulder as a group of Strangman's
men appeared on the far side of the square. They shouted to and fro with the
Admiral, then spotted Kerans and Beatrice a hundred yards away.
Kerans started to run on, the revolver still clasped in his hand, but Beatrice
held him back.
"No, Robert! Look!"
In front of them, stretched arm to arm across the full width of the street,
another group approached, a white-suited man at its centre. He strolled along,
one thumb hooked casually into his belt, the other signaling his men on, his
fingers almost touching the tip of the machete brandished by the man next to
him.
Changing direction, Kerans pulled Beatrice diagonally across the square,
but the first group had fanned out and cut them off. A starshell went up from
the deck of the ship and illuminated the square in its roseate light.
Beatrice stopped, out of breath, helplessly holding the broken heel of her
gold slipper. She looked uncertainly at the men closing in on them.
"Darling… Robert-what about the ship? Try to get back there yourself."
Kerans took her arm and they backed into the shadows below the forward
paddle, hidden by the blades from the shotgun on the bridge. The exertion of
climbing aboard the ship and then running about the square had exhausted
Kerans, and his lungs pumped in painful spasms, so that he could barely
steady the revolver.
"Kerans…" Strangman's cool, ironic voice drifted across the square. He
advanced at a relaxed amble, just within range of the Colt but well screened
by the men on either side of him. All carried machetes and pangas, their faces
amiable and unhurried.
168
"Finis, Kerans… finis." Strangman stopped twenty feet from Kerans, his
sardonic lips wreathed in a soft smile, surveying him with almost kindly pity.
"Sorry, Kerans, but you're being a bit of a nuisance. Throw away the gun or
we'll kill the Dahl girl too." He waited for a few seconds. "I mean it."
Kerans found his voice. "Strangman-"
"Kerans, this is no time for a metaphysical discussion." A note of
annoyance crept into his voice, as if he were dealing with a fractious child.
"Believe me, no time for prayers, no time for anything. I told you to drop the
gun. Then walk forward. My men think you abducted Miss Dahl, they won't
touch her." He added, with a touch of menace: "Come on, Kerans, we don't
want anything to happen to Beatrice, do we? Think what a beautiful mask her
face will make." He tittered insanely. "Better than that old alligator you wore."
Phlegm choking his throat, Kerans swung around and handed the revolver
to Beatrice, pressing her small hands around the butt. Before their eyes could
meet he looked away, inhaling for the last time the musky perfume on her
breasts, then began to walk out into the square as Strangman had ordered.
The latter watched him with an evil smirk, then suddenly leapt forward with a
snarl, whipping the others on.
As the long knives lanced through the air after him Kerans turned and
raced around the paddle, trying to reach the area behind the ship. Then his
feet slipped in one of the foetid pools, before he could catch himself he fell
heavily. He scrambled to his knees, one arm raised helplessly to ward off the
circle of raised machetes, then felt something seize him from behind and pull
him backwards roughly off balance.
Recovering his foothold on the damp cobbles, he heard Strangman shout
in surprise. A group of brown-uniformed men, rifles at their hips, stepped
rapidly from the shadows behind the depot ship where they had been hiding.
At their head was the trim, brisk figure of Colonel Riggs. Two of the soldiers
169
carried a light machinegun, a third man two boxes of belt ammunition. They
quickly set it up on its tripod ten feet in front of Kerans, leveled the
perforated, air-cooled barrel at the confused mob backing away from them.
The rest of the soldiers fanned out in a widening semi-circle, prodding the
slower of Strangman's men with their bayonets.
Most of the crew were shambling backwards in the general melee across
the square, but a couple of them, still holding their pangas, attempted to break
through the cordon. Instantly there was a short decisive volley of shots over
their heads, and they dropped their knives and fell back mutely with the rest.
"Okay, Strangman, that will do very nicely." Riggs rapped his baton across
the Admiral's chest and forced him back.
Completely disconcerted by all this, Strangman gaped blankly at the
soldiers swarming past him. He searched the depot ship helplessly, as if
expecting some large siege cannon to be wheeled forward and reverse the
situation. Instead, however, two helmeted soldiers appeared on the bridge
with a portable searchlight, swiveled its beam down into the square.
Kerans felt someone take his elbow. He looked around at the solicitous
beak-like face of Sergeant Macready, a submachine-gun in the crook of his
arm. At first he almost failed to identify Macready, only with an effort
managed to place his aquiline features, like a face dimly remembered across
the span of a lifetime.
"You all right, sir?" Macready asked softly. "Sorry to jerk you about like
that. Looks as if you've been having a bit of a party here."
170
13 - Too Soon, Too Late
By eight o'clock the next morning Riggs had stabilised the situation and
was able to see Kerans informally. His headquarters were in the testing
station, with a commanding view over the streets below, and particularly of
the paddle-ship in the square. Stripped of their weapons, Strangman and his
crew sat around in the shade under the hull, supervised by the light machinegun
manned by Macready and two of his men.
Kerans and Beatrice had spent the night in the sick-bay aboard Riggs'
patrol cruiser, a well-armed 30-ton PT boat which was now moored against
the hydroplane in the central lagoon. The unit had arrived shortly after
midnight, and a reconnaissance patrol reached the testing station on the
perimeter of the drained lagoon at about the time Kerans entered Strangman's
suite in the depot ship. Hearing the ensuing gunfire, they descended
immediately into the square.
"I guessed Strangman was here," Riggs explained. "One of our aerial
patrols reported seeing the hydroplane about a month ago, and I reckoned
you might have a little trouble with him if you were still hanging on. The
pretext of trying to reclaim the testing station was a fair one." He sat on the
edge of the desk, watching the helicopter circle the open streets. "That should
keep them quiet for a bit."
"Daley seems to have found his wings at last," Kerans commented.
"He's had a lot of practice." Riggs turned his intelligent eyes on Kerans,
asked casually: "By the way, is Hardman here?"
"Hardman?" Kerans shook his head slowly. "No, I haven't seen him since
the day he disappeared. He'll be a long way off by now, Colonel."
171
"You're probably right. I just thought he might be around." He flashed
Kerans a sympathetic smile, evidently having forgiven him for scuttling the
testing station, or sensible enough not to press the matter so soon after
Kerans' ordeal. He pointed to the streets below glowering in the sunlight, the
dry silt on the rooftops and walls like caked dung. "Pretty grim down there.
Damn shame about old Bodkin. He really should have come north with us."
Kerans nodded, looking across the office at the machete scars sliced into
the woodwork around the door, part of the damage gratuitously inflicted on
the station after Bodkin's death. Most of the mess had been cleaned up, and
his body, lying among the bloodstained programme charts in the laboratory
below, flown out to the patrol cruiser. To his surprise Kerans realised that
callously he had already forgotten Bodkin and felt little more than a nominal
pity for him. Riggs' mention of Hardman had reminded him of something far
more urgent and important, the great sun still beating magnetically within his
mind, and a vision of the endless sandbanks and blood-red swamps of the
south passed before his eyes.
He went over to the window, picking a splinter from the sleeve of his fresh
uniform jacket, and stared down at the men huddled under the depot ship.
Strangman and the Admiral had gone forward towards the machine-gun, and
were remonstrating with Macready, who was shaking his head impassively.
"Why don't you arrest Strangman?" he asked.
Riggs laughed shortly. "Because there's absolutely nothing I can hold him
on. Legally, as he full well knows, he was absolutely entitled to defend himself
against Bodkin, kill him if necessary." When Kerans looked round over his
shoulder in surprise he continued: "Don't you remember the Reclaimed Lands
Act and the Dykes Maintenance Regulations? They're still very much in force.
I know Strangman's a nasty piece of work-with that white skin and his
alligators-but strictly speaking he deserves a medal for pumping out the
172
lagoon. If he complains, I'll have a job explaining that machine-gun down
there. Believe me, Robert, if I'd arrived five minutes later and found you
chopped to bits Strangman could have claimed that you were an accomplice
of Bodkin's and I'd have been able to do nothing. He's a clever fellow."
Tired out after only three hours' sleep, Kerans leaned against the window,
smiling wanly to himself as he tried to resolve Riggs' tolerant attitude towards
Strangman with his own experiences of the man. He was conscious that an
even wider gulf now divided Riggs and himself. Although the Colonel was
only a few feet away from him, emphasising his argument with brisk
flourishes of the baton, he was unable to accept wholly the idea of Riggs'
reality, almost as if his image were being projected into the testing station
across enormous distances of time and space by some elaborate threedimensional
camera. It was Riggs, and not himself, who was the time-traveler.
Kerans had noticed a similar lack of physical validity about the rest of the
crew. Many of the original members had been replaced-all those, among them
Wilson and Caldwell, who had begun to experience the deep dreams. For this
reason, perhaps-and partly because of their pallid faces and weak eyes, in so
marked contrast to Strangman's men, the present crew seemed flat and unreal,
moving about their tasks like intelligent androids.
"What about the looting?" he asked.
Riggs shrugged. "Apart from a few trinkets filched from an old
Woolworths he's taken nothing that couldn't be put down to natural
exuberance on the part of his men. As for all the statues and so on, he's doing
a valuable job reclaiming works of art that were perforce abandoned. Though
I'm not sure what his real motives are." He patted Kerans on the shoulder.
"You'll have to forget about Strangman, Robert. The only reason he's sitting
quiet now is that he knows he's got the law on his side. If he hadn't there'd be
a battle royal going on." He broke off. "You look all in, Robert. Are you still
getting these dreams?"
173
"Now and then." Kerans shuddered. "The last few days have been insane
here. It's difficult to describe Strangman-he's like a white devil out of a
voodoo cult. I can't accept the idea that he'll go scot free. When are you going
to re-flood the lagoon?"
"Re-flood the-?" Riggs repeated, shaking his head in bewilderment.
"Robert, you really are out of touch with reality. The sooner you get away
from here the better. The last thing I intend to do is re-flood the lagoon. If
anybody tries I'll personally blow his head off. Reclaiming land, particularly an
urban area like this right in the centre of a former capital city, is a Class A 1
priority. If Strangman is serious about pumping out the next two lagoons he'll
not only get a free pardon but a governor-generalship to boot." He looked
down through the window, as the metal rungs of the fire escape rang in the
sunlight. "Here he comes now, I wonder what's on his evil little mind?"
Kerans went over to Riggs, averting his eyes from the maze of festering
yellow rooftops. "Colonel, you've got to flood it again, Jaws or no laws. Have
you been down in those streets, they're obscene and hideous! It's a nightmare
world that's dead and finished, Strangman's resurrecting a corpse! After two
or three days here you'll-"
Riggs swung away from the desk, cutting Kerans off. An element of
impatience crept into his voice. "I don't intend to stay here for three days," he
snapped curtly. "Don't worry, I'm not suffering from any crazy obsessions
about these lagoons, flooded or otherwise. We're leaving first thing
tomorrow, all of us."
Puzzled, Kerans said: "But you can't leave, Colonel. Strangman will still be
here."
"Of course he will! Do you think that paddle-boat has got wings? There's
no reason for him to leave, if he thinks he can take the big heat waves coming
and the rain-storms. You never know, if he gets a few of these big buildings
174
refrigerated he may be able to. In time, if he reclaims enough of the city, there
might even be an attempt to re-occupy it. When we get back to Byrd I'll
definitely put in a recommendation, anyway. However, at present there's
nothing for me to stay for-I can't move the station now, but it's a fair loss.
Anyway, you and the Dahl girl need a rest. And a brain-lift. Do you realise
how lucky she is to be in one piece? Good God!" He nodded sharply at
Kerans, standing up as a firm rap sounded on the door. "You should be
grateful that I came here in time."
Kerans walked over to the side door into the galley, eager to avoid
Strangman. He paused for a moment to look up at Riggs. "I don't know about
that, Colonel. I'm afraid you came too late."
175
14 - Grand Slam
Crouched down in a small office two floors above the barrage, Kerans
listened to the music playing amid the lights on the top deck of the depot
ship. Strangman's party was still in full swing. Propelled by two junior
members of the crew, the big paddles rotated slowly, their blades dividing the
coloured spot lights and swinging them up into the sky. Seen from above, the
white awnings resembled the marquee of a fairground, a brilliant focus of
noise and festivity in the darkened square.
As a concession to Strangman, Riggs had joined him at this farewell party.
A bargain had been struck between the two leaders: earlier the machine-gun
had been withdrawn and the lower level placed out of bounds to the Colonel's
men, while Strangman agreed to remain within the perimeter of the lagoon
until Riggs had left. All day Strangman and his pack had roved the streets, and
the random sounds of looting and firing echoed to and fro. Even now, as the
last guests, the Colonel and Beatrice Dahl, left the party and climbed the fire
escape to the testing station, fighting had broken out on deck and bottles
were being hurled down into the square.
Kerans had put in a token appearance at the party, keeping well away from
Strangman, who made little attempt to talk to him. At one point, between
cabaret turns, he had swept past Kerans, deliberately brushing his elbow, and
toasted him with his goblet.
"I hope you're not too bored, Doctor. You look tired." He turned a wicked
smile on Riggs, who was sitting erectly on a tasseled silk cushion with a
circumspect expression on his face like a district commissioner at a pasha's
court. "The parties Dr. Kerans and I are used to are very different affairs,
Colonel. They really go with a bang."
"So I believe, Strangman," Riggs replied mildly, but Kerans turned away,
176
unable, like Beatrice, to mask his revulsion for Strangman. She was looking
over her shoulder across the square, a small frown for a moment hiding the
mood of torpor and self-immersion to which she was again returning.
Watching Strangman from the distance as he applauded the next cabaret
turn, Kerans wondered whether in some way he had passed his peak, and was
beginning to disintegrate. He now looked merely loathsome, like a decaying
vampire glutted with evil and horror. The sometime charm had vanished, in
its place a predatory gleam. As soon as he could, Kerans feigned a mild attack
of malaria, and made his way out into the darkness and up the fire escape to
the testing station.
Now determined on the only solution available, Kerans' mind felt clear and
coordinated again, extending outwards beyond the perimeter of the lagoon.
Only fifty miles to the south, the rain-clouds were packed together in tight
layers, blotting out the swamps and archipelagoes of the horizon. Obscured
by the events of the past week, the archaic sun in his mind beat again
continuously with its immense power, its identity merging now with that of
the real sun visible behind the rain-clouds. Relentless and magnetic, it called
him southward, to the great heat and submerged lagoons of the Equator.
Assisted by Riggs, Beatrice climbed up on to the roof of the testing station,
which also served as the helicopter landing stage. When Sergeant Daley
started his engine and the rotors began to spin, Kerans quickly made his way
down to the balcony two floors below. Separated by a hundred yards or so on
either side, he was directly between the helicopter and the barrage, the
continuous terrace of the building linking the three points.
Behind the building was an enormous bank of silt, reaching upwards out of
the surrounding swamp to the railings of the terrace, on to which spilled a
luxurious outcrop of vegetation. Ducking below the broad fronds of the fern
trees, he raced along to the barrage, fitted between the end of the building and
177
the shoulder of the adjacent office block. Apart from the exit creek on the far
side of the lagoon where the pumping scows had been stationed, this was the
only major entry point for the water that had passed into the lagoon. The
original inlet, once twenty yards wide and deep, had shrunk to a narrow
channel clogged with mud and fungi, its six foot-wide mouth blocked by a
rampart of heavy logs. Initially, once the rampart was removed, the rate of
flow would be small, but as more and more of the silt was carried away the
mouth would widen again.
From a small cache below a loose flagstone he withdrew two square black
boxes, each containing six sticks of dynamite lashed together. He had spent all
afternoon searching through the nearby buildings for them, confident that
Bodkin had raided the armoury of the base at the same time that he had
stolen the compass, sure enough finally found the trove in an empty lavatory
cistern.
As the helicopter engine began to fire more loudly, the exhaust spitting
brightly into the darkness, he lit the short 30-second fuse, straddled the rail
and ran out towards the centre of the barrage.
There he bent down and suspended the boxes from a small peg he had
driven into the outer row of logs earlier that evening. They hung safely out of
view, about two feet from the water's edge.
"Dr. Kerans! Get away from there, sir!"
Kerans looked up to see Sergeant Macready at the further end of the
barrage, standing at the rail of the next roof. He leaned forward, suddenly
spotting the flickering end of the fuse, then rapidly unslung his Thompson
gun.
Head down, Kerans raced back along the barrage, reached the terrace as
Macready shouted again and then fired a short burst. The slugs tore at the
178
railings, gouging out pieces of the cement, and Kerans fell as one of the
cupronickel bullets struck his right leg just above the ankle. Pulling himself
over the rail, he saw Macready shoulder the gun and jump down onto the
barrage.
"Macready! Go back!" he shouted to the Sergeant, who was loping along
the wooden planks. "It's going to blow!"
Backing away among the fronds, his voice lost in the roar of the helicopter
as it carried out its take-off check, he helplessly watched Macready stop in the
centre of the barrage and reach down to the boxes.
"Twenty-eight, twenty-nine…" Kerans concluded automatically to himself.
Turning his back on the barrage, he limped away down the terrace, then threw
himself onto the floor.
As the tremendous roar of the explosion lifted up into the dark sky, the
immense fountain of erupting foam and silt briefly illuminated the terrace,
outlining Kerans' spreadeagled form. From an initial crescendo, the noise
seemed to mount in a continuous sustained rumble, the breaking thunder of
the shock wave yielding to the low rush of the bursting cataract. Clods of silt
and torn vegetation spattered on the tiles around Kerans, and he stumbled to
his feet and reached the rail.
Widening as he watched, the water jetted down into the open streets below,
carrying with it huge sections of the silt bank. There was a concerted rush to
the deck of the depot ship, a dozen arms pointing up at the water pouring out
of the breach. It swilled into the square, only a few feet deep, blotting out the
fires and splashing against the hull of the ship, still rocking slightly from the
impact of the explosion.
Then, abruptly, the lower section of the barrage fell forwards, a brace of a
dozen twenty-foot logs going down together. The U-shaped saddle of silt
179
behind collapsed in turn, exposing the full bore of the inlet creek, and what
appeared to be a gigantic cube of water fifty feet high tipped into the street
below like a flopping piece of jelly. With a dull rumbling roar of collapsing
buildings the sea poured in full flood.
"Kerans!"
He turned as a shot whipped overhead, saw Riggs running forward from
the helicopter landing stage, pistol in hand. His engine stalled, Sergeant Daley
was helping Beatrice out of the cabin.
The building was shaking under the impact of the torrent sweeping past its
shoulder. Supporting his right leg with his hand, Kerans hobbled into the lee
of the small tower which had held his previous observation window. From his
trouser belt he pulled the.45 Colt, held the butt in both hands and fired twice
around the corner at the approaching hatless figure of Riggs. Both shots went
wild, but Riggs stopped and backed off a few feet, taking cover behind a
balustrade.
Feet moved quickly towards him and he looked around as Beatrice raced
along the terrace. Reaching the corner as Riggs and Daley shouted after her,
she sank down on her knees beside Kerans.
"Robert, you've got to leave! Now, before Riggs brings more of his men!
He wants to kill you, I know."
Kerans nodded, getting painfully to his feet. "The Sergeant-I didn't realise
he was patrolling. Tell Riggs I'm sorry-" He gestured helplessly, then took a
last look at the lagoon. The black water surged across it through the buildings,
level with the top line of their windows. Upended, its paddles stripped away,
the depot ship drifted slowly towards the far shore, its hull sticking up into
the air like the belly of an expiring whale. Spurts of steam and foam erupted
from its exploding boilers, bursting out through the gashes in the hull as it
180
was driven across the sharp reefs of the half-submerged cornices. Kerans
watched it with a quiet contained pleasure, savouring the fresh tang that the
water had brought again to the lagoon. Neither Strangman nor any members
of his crew were visible, and the few fragments of splintered bridge and
funnel swept away by the water were swallowed and regurgitated by the
boiling undercurrents.
"Robert! Hurry!" Beatrice pulled his arm, glancing back over her shoulder
at the darting figures of Riggs and the pilot only fifty yards away. "Darling,
where are you going? I'm sorry I can't be with you."
"South," Kerans said softly, listening to the roar of the deepening water.
"Towards the sun. You'll be with me, Bea."
He embraced her, then tore himself from her arms and ran to the rear rail
of the terrace, pushing back the heavy fern fronds. As he stepped down onto
the silt bank Riggs and Sergeant Daley appeared around the corner and fired
into the foliage, but Kerans ducked and ran away between the curving trunks,
sinking up to his knees in the soft mud.
The edge of the swamp had receded slightly as the water poured away into
the lagoon, and he painfully dragged the bulky catamaran, home-made from
four fifty-gallon drums arranged in parallel pairs, through the thick rasp-weeds
to the water. Riggs and the pilot emerged through the ferns as he pushed off.
While the outboard kicked into life he lay exhausted on the planking, the
shots from Riggs'.38 cutting through the small triangular sail. Slowly the
interval of water widened to a hundred and then two hundred yards, and he
reached the first of the small islands that grew out of the swamp on the roofs
of isolated buildings. Hidden by them, he sat up and reefed the sail, then
looked back for the last time at the perimeter of the lagoon.
Riggs and the pilot were no longer visible, but high up on the tower of the
181
building he could see the lonely figure of Beatrice, waving slowly towards the
swamp, changing tirelessly from one arm to the other, although she was
unable to distinguish him among the islands. Far to her right, rising up above
the encompassing silt banks, were the other familiar landmarks he knew so
well, even the green roof of the Ritz, fading into the haze. At last all he could
see were the isolated letters of the giant slogan Strangman's men had painted,
looming out of the darkness over the flat water like a concluding epitaph:
TIME ZONE.
The opposing flow of water slowed his progress, and fifteen minutes later,
when the helicopter roared over, he had still not reached the edge of the
swamp. Passing the top floor of a small building, he glided in through one of
the windows, waited quietly as the aircraft roared up and down, machinegunning
the islands.
When it left he pushed on again, within an hour finally navigated the exit
waters of the swamp and entered the broad inland sea that would lead him to
the south. Large islands, several hundred yards in length, covered its surface,
their vegetation crowding out into the water, their contours completely altered
by the rising water in the short period that had elapsed since their search for
Hardman. Shipping the outboard, he set the small sail, made a steady two or
three miles an hour tacking across the light southerly breeze.
His leg had begun to stiffen below the knee, and he opened the small
medical kit he had packed and washed the wound in a penicillin spray, then
bandaged it tightly. Just before dawn, when the pain became unbearable, he
took one of the morphine tablets and fell off into a loud, booming sleep, in
which the great sun expanded until it filled the entire universe, the stars
themselves jolted by each of its beats.
He woke at seven the next morning, lying back against the mast in bright
sunlight, the medical kit open in his lap, the bows of the catamaran rammed
182
lightly into a large fern tree growing off the edge of a small island. A mile
away, flying fifty feet above the water, the helicopter raced along, machinegun
fire flickering from its cabin at the islands below. Kerans shipped the
mast and glided in under the tree, waiting until the helicopter left. Massaging
his leg, but fearful of the morphine, he made a small meal of a bar of
chocolate, the first of ten he had been able to collect. Luckily the petty officer
in charge of stores aboard the patrol boat had been instructed to give Kerans
free access to the medical supplies.
The aerial attacks were resumed at half-hour intervals, the aircraft once
flying directly overhead. From his hiding place in one of the islands Kerans
clearly saw Riggs looking out from the hatchway, his small jaw jutting fiercely.
However, the machine-gun fire became more and more sporadic, and the
flights were finally discontinued that afternoon.
By then, at five o'clock, Kerans was almost completely exhausted. The
noon temperature of a hundred and fifty degrees had drained the life out of
him, and he lay limply under the moistened sail, letting the hot water drip
down onto his chest and face, praying for the cooler air of the evening. The
surface of the water turned to fire, so that the craft seemed to be suspended
on a cloud of drifting flame. Pursued by strange visions, he paddled feebly
with one hand.
183
15 - The Paradises of the Sun
The next day, by good luck, the storm-clouds moved overhead between
himself and the sun, and the air grew markedly cooler, falling to ninety-five
degrees at noon. The massive banks of black cumulus, only four or five
hundred feet above, dimmed the air like a solar eclipse, and he revived
sufficiently to start the outboard and raise his speed to ten miles an hour.
Circling between the islands, he moved on southwards, following the sun that
pounded in his mind. Later that evening, as the rain-storms lashed down, he
felt well enough to stand up on one leg by the mast, letting the torrential
bursts rain across his chest and strip away the ragged fabric of his jacket.
When the first of the storm-belts moved off the visibility cleared, and he
could see the southern edge of the sea, a line of tremendous silt banks over a
hundred yards in height. In the spasmodic sunlight they glittered along the
horizon like fields of gold, the tops of the jungle beyond rising above them.
Half a mile from the shore the reserve tank of the outboard ran dry. He
unbolted the motor and threw it into the water, watched it sink through the
brown surface in a faint wreath of bubbles. He furled the sail and paddled
slowly against the head-breeze. By the time he reached the shore it was dusk,
the shadows sweeping across the huge grey slopes. Limping through the
shallows, he beached the craft, then sat down with his back against one of the
drums. Staring out over the immense loneliness of this dead terminal beach,
he soon fell into an exhausted sleep.
The next morning he dismantled the craft, ported the sections one by one
up the enormous sludge-covered slopes, hoping for a southward extension of
the water-way. Around him the great banks undulated for miles, the curving
dunes dotted with cuttlefish and nautiloids. The sea was no longer visible, and
he was alone with these few lifeless objects, like the debris of a vanished
continuum, one dune giving way to another as he dragged the heavy fiftygallon
drums from crest to crest. Overhead the sky was dull and cloudless, a
184
bland impassive blue, more the interior ceiling of some deep irrevocable
psychosis than the storm-filled celestial sphere he had known during the
previous days. At times, after he had dropped one burden, he would totter
down into the hollow of the wrong dune, find himself stumbling about the
silent basins, their floors cracked into hexagonal plates, like a dreamer
searching for an invisible door out of his nightmare.
Finally he abandoned the craft and trudged on ahead with a small parcel of
supplies, looking back as the drums sank slowly below the surface. Carefully
avoiding the quicksands between the dunes, he moved on towards the jungle
in the distance, where the green spires of the great horsetails and fern trees
reached a hundred feet into the air.
He rested again below a tree on the edge of the forest, carefully cleaning his
pistol. Ahead of him he could hear the bats screech and dive among the dark
trunks in the endless twilight world of the forest floor, the iguanas snarl and
lunge. His ankle had begun to swell painfully; the continual extension of the
damaged muscle had spread its original infection. Cutting a branch off one of
the trees, he hobbled forwards into the shadows.
By evening the rainfall started, slashing at the huge umbrellas a hundred
feet above, the black light only broken when phosphorescent rivers of water
broke and poured down on him. Frightened of resting for the night, he
pressed on, shooting off the attacking iguanas, darting from the shelter of one
massive tree-trunk to the next. Here and there he found a narrow breach in
the canopy overhead, and a pale light would illuminate a small clearing where
the ruined top floor of a sunken building loomed through the foliage, the rain
beating across it. But the evidence of any man-made structures was
increasingly scanty, the towns and cities of the south swallowed by the rising
silt and vegetation.
For three days he pushed ahead sleeplessly through the forest, feeding on
185
giant berries like clusters of apples, cutting a heavier branch as a crutch.
Periodically, to his left, he glimpsed the silver back of a jungle river, its surface
dancing in the rain-storms, but massive mangroves formed the banks and he
was unable to reach it.
So his descent into the phantasmagoric forest continued, the rain sweeping
relentlessly across his face and shoulders. Sometimes it would stop abruptly,
and clouds of steam filled the intervals between the trees, hanging over the
waterlogged floor like diaphanous fleeces, only dispersing when the
downpour resumed.
It was during one of these intermissions that he climbed a steep rise in the
centre of a broad clearing, hoping to escape the drenching mists, found
himself in a narrow valley between wooded slopes. Crowded with vegetation,
the hills rolled around the valley like the dunes he had crossed earlier,
enclosing him in a green dripping world. Occasionally, as the mists swirled
and lifted, he caught a glimpse of the jungle river between the peaks half a
mile away. The wet sky was stained by the setting sun, the pale crimson mists
tracing the hill crests in the distance. Pulling himself over the wet clay-like
soil, he stumbled into what seemed to be the remains of a small temple.
Tilting gate posts led towards a semi-circle of shallow steps, where five ruined
columns formed a ragged entrance. The roof had collapsed, and only a few
feet of the side walls still stood. At the far end of the nave the battered altar
looked out over an uninterrupted view of the valley, where the sun sank
slowly from sight, its giant orange disc veiled by the mists.
Hoping to shelter there during the night, Kerans walked down the aisle,
pausing listlessly as the rain renewed itself. Reaching the altar, he rested his
arms on the chest-high marble table, and watched the contracting disc of the
sun, its surface stirring rhythmically like the slag on a bowl of molten metal.
"Aaa-ah!" A faint almost inhuman cry sounded thinly into the wet air, like
186
the groan of a stricken animal. Kerans looked around him quickly, wondering
if an iguana had followed him into the ruin. But the jungle and the valley and
the whole place of stones were silent and motionless, the rain streaming
across the cracks in the collapsing walls.
"Aah-ah!" This time the sound came from in front of him, somewhere
towards the fading sun. The disc had pulsed again, apparently drawing forth
this strangled response, half in protest, half in gratitude.
Wiping the moisture from his face, Kerans stepped cautiously around the
altar, drew back with a start when he almost tripped over the ragged remains
of a man sitting with his back to the altar, head propped against the stone.
The sounds had obviously come from this emaciated figure, but it was so
inert and blackened that Kerans assumed it must be dead.
The man's long legs, like two charred poles of wood, stuck out uselessly in
front of him, sheathed in a collection of tattered black rags and bits of bark.
His arms and sunken chest were similarly clothed, strung together with short
lengths of creeper. A once luxuriant but now thinning black beard covered
most of his face, and the rain poured across his hollowed but jutting jaw,
which was raised to the fading light. Fitfully the sun shone on the exposed
skin of his face and hands. One of the latter, a skeletal green claw, suddenly
rose like a hand from a grave and pointed at the sun as if identifying it, then
fell limply to the ground. As the disc pulsed again the face showed some slight
reaction. The deep recesses around the mouth and nose, the hollowed cheeks
that encroached so deeply over the broad jaw that they seemed to leave no
space for the buccal cavity within, filled for a moment as if a single breath of
life had passed momentarily through the body.
Unable to advance, Kerans watched the huge emaciated figure on the
ground before him. The man was no more than a resurrected corpse, without
food or equipment, propped against the altar like someone jerked from his
187
grave and abandoned to await the Day of Judgement.
Then he realised why the man had failed to notice him. The dirt and raw
sun-blistered skin around the deep eye sockets turned them into blackened
funnels, at the base of which a dull festering gleam reflected faintly the distant
sun. Both eyes were almost completely occluded by corneal cancers, and
Kerans guessed that they would be able to see little more than the dying sun.
As the disc fell away behind the jungle in front of them and the dusk swept
like a pall through the grey rain, the man's head raised itself painfully, as if
trying to retain the image that had burnt itself so devastatingly upon his
retinas, then slumped to one side against his stone pillow. Flies began to
swarm across the ground and buzzed over his streaming cheeks.
Kerans bent down to speak to the man, who seemed to sense his
movement. Blindly, the hollowed eyes searched the dull nimbus beside him.
"Hey, fellow." His voice was a feeble rasp. "You there, soldier, come here!
Where have you come from?" His left hand scuttled around the wet stony
clay like a crab, as if looking for something. Then he turned back to the
vanished sun, oblivious of the flies settling on his face and beard. "It's gone
again! Aa-aah! It's moving away from me! Help me up, soldier, we'll follow it.
Now, before it goes for ever."
He held his claw out to Kerans, like a dying beggar. Then his bead slumped
back again and the rain poured over his black skull.
Kerans knelt down. Despite the effects of the sun and rain, the remnants
of the man's uniform trousers showed him to be an officer. His right hand,
which had remained closed, now opened feebly. In his palm was a small silver
cylinder with a circular dial, a pocket compass carried in aircrew rescue kits.
"Hey, soldier!" The man had revived abruptly, his eyeless head turning
towards Kerans. "I order you, don't leave me! You can rest now, while I keep
188
watch. Tomorrow we'll move on."
Kerans sat down beside him, undid his small parcel and began to wipe the
rain and dead flies from the man's face. Taking the ravaged cheeks in his
hands like a child's, he said carefully: "Hardman, this is Kerans-Doctor
Kerans. I'll go with you, but try to rest." Hardman showed no response to the
name, his brows creasing slightly in puzzlement.
While Hardman lay back against the altar, Kerans began to dig up some of
the cracked flagstones from the aisle with his clasp knife, carried the pieces
back through the rain and built a crude stone shelter around the supine figure,
covering the cracks with creeper torn from the walls. Although shielded from
the rain, Hardman became slightly restless in the dark alcove, but soon fell
into a shallow sleep, now and then breaking into stertorous breaths. Kerans
went back through the darkness to the jungle edge, picked an armful of edible
berries from the trees, then returned to the shelter and sat beside Hardman
until the dawn broke over the hills behind them.
He stayed with Hardman for the next three days, feeding him with the
berries and spraying his eyes with what was left of the penicillin. He
strengthened the hut with more of the flagstones, and built a rough pallaisse
of leaves for them to sleep on. During the afternoon and evening Hardman
would sit in the open doorway, watching the distant sun through the mists. In
the intervals between the storms its rain-washed beams lit his green-tinged
skin with a strange intense glow. He failed to remember Kerans, and
addressed him simply as 'Soldier', sometimes rousing himself from his torpor
to issue a series of disconnected orders for the morrow. Increasingly, Kerans
felt that Hardman's real personality was now submerged deep within his
mind, and that his external behaviour and responses were merely pallid
reflections of this, overlayed by his delirium and exposure symptoms. Kerans
guessed that his sight had been lost about a month earlier, and that he had
crawled instinctively to the higher ground supporting the ruin. From there he
189
could best perceive the sun, the sole entity now strong enough to impinge its
image upon his fading retinas.
On the second day Hardman began to eat voraciously, as if preparing
himself for another advance through the jungle, by the end of the third day
had consumed several bunches of the giant berries. The strength seemed to
return suddenly to his great ragged frame, and during the afternoon he
managed to support himself on his legs, leaning back against the doorway as
the sun sank behind the wooded hills. Whether he now recognised Kerans the
latter was unsure, but the monologue of orders and instructions ceased.
Kerans felt little surprise when he woke the next morning and found
Hardman had gone. Rousing himself in the thin dawn light, Kerans limped
down the valley towards the edge of the forest, where a small stream forked
on its way towards the distant river. He looked up at the dark boughs of the
fern trees hanging in the silence. Feebly he shouted Hardman's name,
listening to its muted echoes fall away among the somber trunks, and then
returned to the hut. He accepted Hardman's decision to move on without
comment, assuming that he might or might not see the man again in the
course of their common odyssey southwards. As long as his eyes were strong
enough to sense the distant signals transmitted by the sun, and as long as the
iguanas failed to scent him, Hardman would move forwards feeling his way
through the forest hand over hand, head raised to the sunlight breaking
among the branches.
Kerans waited a further two days at the hut, in case Hardman chose to
return, then set out himself. His medical supplies were now exhausted, and all
he carried was a bag of berries and the Colt, containing two shells. His watch
was still running, and he used it as a compass, also keeping a careful record of
the passage of the days by notching his belt each morning.
Following the valley, he waded through the shallow stream, intending to
190
reach the shores of the distant river. Intermittently heavy rain-storms beat the
surface of the water, but these now seemed concentrated during a few hours
in the afternoon and evening.
When the course of the river required him to move in a westerly direction
for several miles to reach its banks, he gave up the attempt and pressed on
southwards, leaving the deeper jungle of the hill region and entering a lighter
forest, which in turn gave way to large tracts of swamp.
Skirting these, he abruptly stepped out on to the shores of an immense
lagoon, over a mile in diameter, ringed by a beach of white sand, through
which protruded the top floors of a few ruined apartment houses, like beach
chalets seen at a distance. In one of these he rested for a day, trying to mend
his ankle, which had become black and swollen. Looking out from the
window at the disc of water, he watched the afternoon rain discharge itself
into the surface with relentless fury; as the clouds moved away and the water
smoothed itself into a glass sheet its colours seemed to recapitulate all the
changes he had witnessed in his dreams.
That he had travelled over a hundred and fifty miles southward he could
tell from the marked rise in temperature. Again the heat had become all pervading,
rising to a hundred and forty degrees, and he felt reluctant to leave
the lagoon, with its empty beaches and quiet ring of jungle. For some reason
he knew that Hardman would soon die, and that his own life might not long
survive the massive unbroken jungles to the south.
Half asleep, he lay back thinking of the events of the past years that had
culminated in their arrival at the central lagoons and launched him upon his
neuronic odyssey, and of Strangman and his insane alligators, and, with a deep
pang of regret and affection, holding her memory clearly before his mind as
long as he could, of Beatrice and her quickening smile.
At last he tied the crutch to his leg again, and with the butt of the empty.45
191
scratched on the wall below the window, sure that no-one would ever read
the message:
27th day. Have rested and am moving south.
All is well.
Kerans.
So he left the lagoon and entered the jungle again, within a few days was
completely lost, following the lagoons southward through the increasing rain
and heat, attacked by alligators and giant bats, a second Adam searching for
the forgotten paradises of the reborn Sun.

The End
